CARL SAGAN 


THE DRAGONS 
OF EDEN 


SPECULATIONS ON THE EVOLUTION 
OF HUMAN INTELLIGENCE 

“The number of scientists who can speak 
in clear tongues and occasionally touch 
on near-poetry is small. ). Bronowski was 
one. Loren Eiseley is another. To these 
names now add: Carl Sagan. Would that 
we could clone a dozen more like him in 
the next half-century.” 

— Ray Bradbury 

In The Cosmic Connection , Dr. Carl Sagan 
dramatized for the layman the search for 
life beyond the Earth. Here he turns with 
the same lucidity and excitement to the 
equally fascinating inner world of the 
mind. In a breathtaking overview from 
prehistory to the present he explains how 
human beings evolved, genes and brains 
together; who our ancestors and their 
competitors were; how our brains and the 
brains of other animals work; and why 
other intelligent beings will be sufficiently 
like us intellectually to permit interstellar 
communication. 

Throughout the book there are quite 
literally mind-blowing revelations about 
what we have learned recently of the abil- 
ity of other animals to reason, what com- 
puters have taught us about the mecha- 
nism of our brains, and what the latest 
theories are about the functions of sleep 
and dreams and the storage of memory. 
There are also fascinating excursions into 
myth and legend and their possible rela- 
tionship to recent discoveries. And there 
are Dr. Sagan’s bold speculations on the 
implications of these discoveries, and on 
what the next steps in human evolution 
may be. 



OTHER BOOKS BY CARL SAGAN: 


The Cosmic Connection: An Extraterrestrial Perspective 
Other Worlds 

Mars and the Mind of Man (with Ray Bradbury, Arthur Clarke, 
Brace Murray, and Walter Sullivan) 

Intelligent Life in the Universe (with I. S. Shklovskii) 

Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence (editor) 

UFOs: A Scientific Debate (editor, with Thornton Page) 




THE 

THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 

SPECULATIONS ON THE EVOLUTION OF HUMAN INTELLIGENCE 
~ CARL SAGAN 


RANDOM HOUSE NEW YORK 


Copyright © 1977 by Carl Sagan 

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American 
Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by 
Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada 
by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. 

Since this page cannot legibly accommodate all the permis- 
sions and acknowledgments, they begin below and will run 
over onto the following page. 

. Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Sagan, Carl, 1934- 
The dragons of Eden. 

Bibliography: p. 

Includes index 

1. Intellect. 2. Brain. 3. Genetic 
psychology. I. Title. 

BF431.S2 153 76-53472 

tsbn 0-394-4 1045-9 

Manufactured in the United States of America 
9876543 


PERMISSION ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Endpapers, chapter openings, pages 78 and 231: Courtesy of The Escher 
Foundation — Haags Gemeentemuseum — The Hague. Pages 34 and 35: From 
The Great Ravelled knot by George W. Gray, Scientific American , October 
1948, pp. 32 - 33 - Copyright © 1948 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights 
reserved. Page 59: From The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 26, pp. 365-381, 
Figure 1 (1965). Reproduced by copyright permission of Rockefeller Uni- 
versity and Dr. Elizabeth Gantt. Page 63: Reprinted by permission of Science 
News: The Weekly News Magazine of Science. Copyright © 1976 by Science 
Service Inc. Page 73: From Effects of Focal Brain Injury on Human Behavior” 


by Hans-Lukas Teuber on page 462 of The Nervous System, Volume 2: The 
Clinical Neurosciences, edited by Donald B. Tower (New York: Raven Press, 
1975 ) • Reprinted by permission of the publisher. Page 85: From p. 60 of Man- 
kind in the Making, revised edition by William Howells, drawings by Janis 
Cirulis. Copyright © 1959, 1967 by William Howells. Reproduced by permis- 
sion of Doubleday and Company, Inc. Page 86: LIFE NATURE LIBRARY, 
Early Man, by F. Clark Howell and the Editors of TIME-LIFE Books, draw- 
ings by Jay H. Matternes. Copyright © 1965, 1973 Time, Inc. Reprinted by 
permission. Photograph by Henry B. Beville. Page 90: From Not From the 
Apes, by Bjorn Kurten. Copyright © 1972 by Bjorn Kurten. Reprinted by per- 
mission of Pantheon Books, a Division of Random House, Inc. Pages 110 and 
111: Courtesy of Dr. Beatrice and Dr. Robert Gardner, Department of Psy- 
chology, The University of Nevada, Reno. Paces 114 and 115: From “Read- 
ing and Sentence Completion by a Chimpanzee,” by Duane M. Rumbaugh et al., 
Science, November 16, 1974, Volume 182, pp. .731-733, Figures 1 and 2. 
Copyright © 1973 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Reprinted by permission of the publisher and Dr. D. M. Rumbaugh. Page 
129: Photograph courtesy of Dr. James Maas, Department of Psychology, 
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York. Slide #7, Slide Group for General 
Psychology, Set 2; published by McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1974. Page 134: From 
“A New Specimen of Stenonychosaurus from the Oldman Formation (Creta- 
ceous) of Alberta” by Dale A. Russell. Reproduced by permission of the National 
Research Council of Canada from the Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 
Volume 6, pp. 595-612; 1969. Page 136: From a mural by Charles R. Knight. 
Courtesy of The Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago. Reprinted by 
permission. Page 159: From “The Split Brain in Man” by Michael S. Gazzaniga, 
Scientific American, August 1967, Volume 217, #2, page 26. Copyright © 1967 
by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved. Pages 160 and 162: From 
“Perception in the Absence of the Neocortical Commissures” by R. W. Sperry, 
pp. 126, 129, in Perception and Its Disorders, Proceedings of the Association for 
Research in Nervous and Mental Disease, December 6 and 7, 1968, Volume 48. 
Copyright © 1968 by the Association for Research in Nervous and Mental 
Disease. Reprinted by permission of the publisher. Page 163: Originally 
published in Neuropsychologia, Volume 9, pp. 247-259. Copyright © 1971 
by Pergamon Press, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Pergamon Press. Page 
165: From “The Split Brain in Man” by Michael S. Gazzaniga, Scientific 
American, August 1967, Volume 217, #2, page 28. Reprinted by permission 
of the author. Page 178: LIFE NATURE LIBRARY, Early Man, by F. Clark 
Howell and the Editors of TIME-LIFE books, drawings by Jay H. Mettemes. 
Copyright © 1965, 1973 Time, Inc. Reprinted by permission. Photograph by 
Henry B. Beville. Page 198: From The Conscious Brain by Steven Rose. Copy- 
right © 1973 by Steven Rose. Reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, 
Inc. Pages 214 and 215: Photographs courtesy of the Computer Graphics 
Department, Cornell University. Page 223: Photograph courtesy of MOTOROLA 
Semiconductor Products, Inc. 


For my wife, Linda, with love 

Mankind is poised midway between the gods and the beasts. 
Plotinus 

The main conclusion arrived at in this work, namely, that man is de- 
scended from some lowly-organized form, will, I regret to think, be 
highly distasteful to many persons. But there can hardly be a doubt that 
we are descended from barbarians. The astonishment which I felt on 
first seeing a party of Fuegians on a wild and broken shore will never 
be forgotten by me, for the reflection at once rushed into my mind — 
such were our ancestors. These men were absolutely naked and bedaubed 
with paint, their long hair was tangled, their mouths frothed in excite- 
ment, and their expression was wild, startled, and distrustful. They 
possessed hardly, any arts, and, like wild animals, lived on what they 
could catch; they had no government, and were merciless to everyone 
not of their own small tribe. He who has seen a savage in his native 
land will not feel much shame, if forced to acknowledge that the blood 
of some more humble creature flows in his veins. For my own part, I 
would as soon be descended from that heroic little monkey, who braved 
his dreaded enemy in order to save the life of his keeper; or from that 
old baboon who, descending from the mountains, carried away in triumph 
his young comrade from a crowd of astonished dogs — as from a savage 
who delights to torture his enemies, offers up bloody sacrifices, practices 
infanticide without remorse, treats his wives like slaves, knows no de- 
cency, and is haunted by the grossest superstitions. 

Man may be excused for feeling some pride at having risen, though 
not through his own exertions, to the very summit of the organic scale; 
and the fact of his having thus risen, instead of having been aboriginally 
placed there, may give him hopes for a still higher destiny in the distant 
future. But we are not here concerned with hopes or fears, only with 
the truth as far as our reason allows us to discover it. I have given the 
evidence to the best of my ability; and we must acknowledge, as it 


seems to me, that man with all his noble qualities, with sympathy which 
feels for the most debased, with benevolence which extends not only to 
other men but to the humblest living creature, with his godlike intellect 
which has penetrated into the movements and constitution of the solar 
system — with all these exalted powers — Man still bears in his bodily 
frame the indelible stamp of his lowly origin. 

Charles Darwin 
The Descent of Man 


I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls. 
Job 30:29 


CONTENTS 


Introduction ■ 1 

I 

The Cosmic Calendar • n 

II 

Genes and Brains • 19 

III 

The Brain and the Chariot • 49 

IV 

Eden as a Metaphor: The Evolution of Man • 81 

V 

The Abstractions of Beasts • 105 

VI 

Tales of Dim Eden • 125 

VII 

Lovers and Madmen • 153 

VIII 

The Future Evolution of the Brain • 187 

IX 

Knowledge is Our Destiny: Terrestrial 
and Extraterrestrial Intelligence • 227 

Acknowledgments • 239 
Bibliography • 241 
Glossary • 251 
Index • 257 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


INTRODUCTION 

In good speaking, should not the mind of the speaker 
know the truth of the matter about which he is to 
speak? 

Plato 

Phaedrus 


I do not know where to find in any literature, 
whether ancient or modern, any adequate account 
of that nature with which I am acquainted. My- 
thology comes nearest to it of any. 

Henry David Thoreau 
The Journal 



acob Bhonowski was one of a small group of men 
and women in any age who find all of human 
knowledge — the arts and sciences, philosophy and 
psychology — interesting and accessible. He was 


not confined to a single discipline, but ranged over the entire 
panorama of human learning. His book and television series, 
The Ascent of Man, are a superb teaching tool and a remarkable 
memorial; they are, in a way, an account of how human beings 
and human brains grew up together. 

His last chapter/ episode, called “The Long Childhood,” de- 
scribes the extended period of time — longer relative to our life- 
span than for any other species — in which young humans are 
dependent on adults and exhibit immense plasticity — that is, 
the ability to learn from their environment and their culture. 
Most organisms on Earth depend on their genetic information, 
which is “prewired” into their nervous systems, to a much 
greater extent than they do on their extragenetic information, 
which is acquired during their lifetimes. For human beings, and 
indeed for all mammals, it is the other way around. While our 
behavior is still significantly controlled by our genetic inheri- 
tance, we have, through our brains, a much richer opportunity 
to blaze new behavioral and cultural pathways on short time 
scales. We have made a kind of bargain with nature: our chil- 
dren will be difficult to raise, but their capacity for new learn- 
ing will greatly enhance the chances of survival of the human 
species. In addition, human beings have, in the most recent few 
tenths of a percent of our existence, invented not only extra- 
genetic but also extrasomatic knowledge: information stored 




4 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


outside our bodies, of which writing is the most notable 
example. 

The time scale for evolutionary or genetic change is very 
long. A characteristic period for the emergence of one ad- 
vanced species from another is perhaps a hundred thousand 
years; and very often the differences in behavior between closely 
1 elated species say, lions and tigers — do not seem very great. 
An example of recent evolution of organ systems in humans is 
our toes. The big toe plays an important function in balance 
while walking; the other toes have much less obvious utility. 
They are clearly evolved from fingerlike appendages for grasp- 
ing and swinging, like those of arboreal apes and monkeys. This 
evolution constitutes a respecialization — the adaptation of an 
organ system originally evolved for one function to another and 
quite different function — which required about ten million 
years to emerge. (The feet of the mountain gorilla have under- 
gone a similar although quite independent evolution. ) 

But today we do not have ten million years to wait for the 
next advance. We live in a time when our world is changing at 
an unprecedented rate. While the changes are largely of our 
own making, they cannot be ignored. We must adjust and adapt 
and control, or we perish. 

Only an extragenetic learning system can possibly cope with 
the swiftly changing circumstances that our species faces. Thus 
the recent rapid evolution of human intelligence is not only the 
cause of but also the only conceivable solution to the many 
seiious problems that beset us. A better understanding of the 
nature and evolution of human intelligence just possibly might 
help us to deal intelligently with our unknown and perilous 
future. 

I am interested in the evolution of intelligence for another 
reason as well. We now have at our command, for the first time 
in human history, a powerful tool — the large radio telescope — 
which is capable of communication over immense interstellar 
distances. We are just beginning to employ it in a halting and 
tentative manner, but with a perceptibly increasing pace, to 


INTRODUCTION 


5 


determine whether other civilizations on unimaginably distant 
and exotic worlds may be sending radio messages to us. Both 
the existence of those other civilizations and the nature of the 
messages they may be sending depend on the universality of 
the process of evolution of intelligence that has occurred on 
Earth. Conceivably, some hints or insights helpful in the quest 
for extraterrestrial intelligence might be derived from an in- 
vestigation of the evolution of terrestrial intelligence. 

I was pleased and honored to deliver the first Jacob Bronow- 
ski Memorial Lecture in Natural Philosophy in November 1975, 
at the University of Toronto. In writing this book, I have ex- 
panded substantially the scope of that lecture, and have been 
in return provided with an exhilarating opportunity to learn 
something about subjects in which I am not expert. I found 
irresistible the temptation to synthesize some of what I learned 
into a coherent picture, and to tender some hypotheses on the 
nature and evolution of human intelligence that may be novel, 
or that at least have not been widely discussed. 

The subject is a difficult one. While I have formal training in 
biology, and have worked for many years on the origin and 
early evolution of life, I have little formal education in, for 
example, the anatomy and physiology of the brain. Accordingly, 
I proffer the following ideas with a substantial degree of trepi- 
dation; I know very well that many of them are speculative and 
can be proved or disproved only on the anvil of experiment. At 
the very least, this inquiry has provided me with an opportunity 
to look into an entrancing subject; perhaps my remarks will 
stimulate others to look more deeply. 

The great principle of biology — the one that, as far as we 
know, distinguishes the biological from the physical sciences — 
is evolution by natural selection, the brilliant discovery of 
Charles Darwin and Alfred Bussel Wallace in the middle of the 
nineteenth century.* It is through natural selection, the pre- 

° Since the time of the famous Victorian debate between Bishop 
Wilberforce and T. H. Huxley, there has been a steady and notably un- 


6 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


ferential survival and replication of organisms that are by 
accident better adapted to their environments, that the elegance 
and beauty of contemporary life forms have emerged. The de- 
velopment of an organ system as complex as the brain must be 
inextricably tied to the earlier history of life, its fits and starts 
and dead ends, the tortuous adaptation of organisms to condi- 
tions that change once again, leaving the life form that once 
was supremely adapted again in danger of extinction. Evolution 
is adventitious and not foresighted. Only through the deaths of 
an immense number of slightly maladapted organisms are we, 
brains and all, here today. 

Biology is more like history than it is like physics; the acci- 
dents and errors and lucky happenstances of the past power- 
fully prefigure the present. In approaching as difficult a biologi- 
cal pioblem as the nature and evolution of human intelligence, 
it seems to me at least prudent to give substantial weight to 
arguments derived from the evolution of the brain. 


productive barrage fired against the Darwin/Wallace ideas, often by those 
with doctrinal axes to grind. Evolution is a fact amply demonstrated by 
the fossil record and by contemporary molecular biology. Natural selec- 
tion is a successful theory devised to explain the fact of evolution. For 
a very polite response to recent criticisms of natural selection, including 
the quaint view that it is a tautology (“Those who survive survive”), see 
the article by Gould (1976) listed in the references at the back of this 
book. Darwin was, of course, a man of his times and occasionally given — 
as in his remarks on the inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego quoted above — 
to self-congratulatory comparisons of Europeans with other peoples. In 
fact, human society in pretechnological times was much more like that 
of the compassionate, communal and cultured Bushman hunter-gatherers 
of the Kalahari Desert than the Fuegians Darwin, with some justification, 
derided. But the Darwinian insights — on the existence of evolution, on 
natural selection as its prime cause, and on the relevance of these con- 
cepts to the nature of human beings — are landmarks in the history of 
human inquiry, the more so because of the dogged resistance which such 
ideas evoked in Victorian England, as, to a lesser extent, thev still do 
today. 


INTRODUCTION 


7 


My fundamental premise about the brain is that its workings 
— what we sometimes call “mind” — are a consequence of its 
anatomy and physiology, and nothing more. “Mind” may be a 
consequence of the action of the components of the brain 
severally or collectively. Some processes may be a function of 
the brain as a whole. A few students of the subject seem to have 
concluded that, because they have been unable to isolate and 
localize all higher brain functions, no future generation of 
neuroanatomists will be able to achieve this objective. But ab- 
sence of evidence is not evidence of absence. The entire recent 
history of biology shows that we are, to a remarkable degree, 
the results of the interactions of an extremely complex array of 
molecules; and the aspect of biology that was once considered 
its holy of holies, the nature of the genetic material, has now 
been fundamentally understood in terms of the chemistry of its 
constituent nucleic acids, DNA and RNA, and their operational 
agents, the proteins. There are many instances in science, and 
particularly in biology, where those closest to the intricacies of 
the subject have a more highly developed (and ultimately 
erroneous ) sense of its intractability than those at some remove. 
On the other hand, those at too great a distance may, I am well 
aware, mistake ignorance for perspective. At any rate, both 
because of the clear trend in the recent history of biology and 
because there is not a shred of evidence to support it, I will not 
in these pages entertain any hypotheses on what used to be 
called the mind-body dualism, the idea that inhabiting the mat- 
ter of the body is something made of quite different stuff, called 
mind. 

Part of the enjoyment and indeed delight of this subject is its 
contact with all areas of human endeavor, particularly with the 
possible interaction between insights obtained from brain phys- 
iology and insights obtained from human introspection. There 
is, fortunately, a long history of the latter, and in former times 
the richest, most intricate and most profound of these were 
called myths. “Myths,’ declared Salustius in the fourth century, 
are things which never happened but always are.” In the 


8 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


Platonic dialogues and The Republic, every time Socrates 
cranks up a myth — the parable of the cave, to take the most 
celebrated example — we know that we have arrived at some- 
thing central. 

I am not here employing the word “myth” in its present 
popular meaning of something widely believed and contrary to 
fact, but rather in its earlier sense, as a metaphor of some sub- 
tlety on a subject difficult to describe in any other way. Ac- 
cordingly, I have interspersed in the discussion on the following 
pages occasional excursions into myths, ancient and modern. 
The title of the book itself comes from the unexpected aptness 
of several different myths, traditional and contemporary. 

While I hope that some of my conclusions may be of interest 
to those whose profession is the study of human intelligence, I 
have written this book for the interested layman. Chapter 2 
presents arguments of somewhat greater difficulty than the rest 
of this inquiry, but still, I hope, accessible with only a little 
effort. Thereafter, the book should be smooth sailing. Occa- 
sional technical terms are usually defined when first introduced, 
and are collected in the glossary. The figures and the glossary 
are additional tools to aid those with no formal background in 
science, although understanding my arguments and agreeing 
with them are not, I suspect, the same thing. 

In 1754, Jean Jacques Rousseau, in the opening paragraph of 
his Dissertation on the Origin and Foundation of the Inequitij 
of Mankind, wrote : 

Important as it may be, in order to judge rightly of the natural 
state of man, to consider him from his origin ... I shall not 
follow his organization through its successive developments. . . . 
On this subject I coidd form none but vague and almost imagi- 
nary conjectures. Comparative anatomy has as yet made too 
little progress, and the observations of naturalists are too un- 
certain to afford an adequate basis for any solid reasoning. 

Rousseau’s cautions of more than two centuries ago are valid 
still. Rut there has been remarkable progress in investigating 


INTRODUCTION 


9 


both comparative brain anatomy and animal and human be- 
havior, which he correctly recognized as critical to the problem. 
It may not be premature today to attempt a preliminary 
synthesis. 


What seest thou else 

In the dark backward and abysm of time? 

Wm. Shakespeare 
The Tempest 



he world is very old, and human beings are very 
young. Significant events in our personal lives are 
measured in years or less; our lifetimes in decades; 
our family genealogies in centuries; and all of re- 


corded history in millennia. But we have, been preceded by an 
awesome vista of time, extending for prodigious periods into 
the past, about which we know little — both because there are 
no written records and because we have real difficulty in grasp- 
ing the immensity of the intervals involved. 

Yet we are able to date events in the remote past. Geological 
stratification and radioactive dating provide information on 
archaeological, paleontological and geological events; and astro- 
physical theory provides data on the ages of planetary surfaces, 
stars, and the Milky Way Galaxy, as well as an estimate of the 
time that has elapsed since that extraordinary event called the 
Big Bang- — an explosion that involved all of the matter and 
energy in the present universe. The Big Bang may be the begin- 
ning of the universe, or it may be a discontinuity in which infor- 
mation about the earlier history of the universe was destroyed. 
But it is certainly the earliest event about which we have any 
record. 

The most instructive way I know to express this cosmic chron- 
ology is to imagine the fifteen-billion-year lifetime of the uni- 
verse (or at least its present incarnation since the Big Bang) 
compressed into the span of a single year. Then every billion 
years of Earth history would correspond to about twenty-four 
days of our cosmic year, and one second of that year to 475 real 
revolutions of the Earth about the sun. On pages 14 through 16 




14 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


I present the cosmic chronology in three forms: a list of some 
representative pre-December dates; a calendar for the month 
of December; and a closer look at the late evening of New 
Years Eve. On this scale, the events of onr history books — even 
books that make significant efforts to deprovincialize the present 
— are so compressed that it is necessary to give a second-by- 
second recounting of the last seconds of the cosmic year. Even 
then, we find events listed as contemporary that we have been 
taught to consider as widely separated in time. In the history of 
life, an equally rich tapestry must have been woven in other 
periods — for example, between 10:02 and 10:03 on the morning 
of April 6th or September 16th. But we have detailed records 
only for the very end of the cosmic year. 

The chronology corresponds to the best evidence now avail- 
able. But some of it is rather shaky. No one would be astounded 
if, for example, it turns out that plants colonized the land in the 
Ordovician rather than the Silurian Period; or that segmented 
worms appeared earlier in the Precambrian Period than indi- 
cated. Also, in the chronology of the last ten seconds of the 
cosmic year, it was obviously impossible for me to include all 
significant events; I hope I may be excused for not having 
explicitly mentioned advances in art, music and literature or the 


PRE-DECEMBER DATES 


Big Bang 

Origin of the Milky Way Galaxy 
Origin of the solar system 
Formation of the Earth 
Origin of life on Earth 

Formation of the oldest rocks known on Earth 
Date of oldest fossils (bacteria and blue-green algae) 
Invention of sex ( by microorganisms ) 

Oldest fossil photosynthetic plants 
Eukaryotes (first cells with nuclei) flourish 

~ = approximately 


January 1 
May 1 
September 9 
September 14 
~ September 25 
October 2 
October 9 
~ November 1 
November 12 
November 15 



i6 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


DECEMBER 3 1 

Origin of Proconsul and Ramapithecus , probable 

ancestors of apes and men 

~ 1:30 P.M. 

First humans 

~ 10:30 p.m. 

Widespread use of stone tools 

11:00 p.m. 

Domestication of fire by Peking man 

11:46 p.m. 

Beginning of most recent glacial period 

11:56 p.m. 

Seafarers settle Australia 

11:58 p.m. 

Extensive cave painting in Europe 

11:59 p.m. 

Invention of agriculture 

11:59:20 P.M. 

Neolithic civilization; first cities 

11:59:35 p.m. 

First dynasties in Sumer, Ebla and Egypt; 

development of astronomy 

11:59:50 p.m. 

Invention of the alphabet; Akkadian Empire 

11:59:51 p.m. 

Hammurabic legal codes in Babylon; Middle 

Kingdom in Egypt 

11:59:52 P.M. 

Bronze metallurgy; Mycenaean culture; Trojan War; 

Olmec culture: invention of the compass 

11:59:53 P.M. 

Iron metallurgy; First Assyrian Empire; Kingdom of 

Israel; founding of Carthage by Phoenicia 

11:59:54 P.M. 

Asokan India; Ch’in Dynasty China; 

Periclean Athens; birth of Buddha 

11:59:55 p.m. 

Euclidean geometry; Archimedean physics; 

Ptolemaic astronomy; Eoman Empire; 

birth of Christ 

11:59:56 P.M. 

Zero and decimals invented in Indian arithmetic; 

Rome falls; Moslem conquests 

11:59:57 p.m. 

Mayan civilization; Sung Dynasty China; Byzantine 

empire; Mongol invasion; Crusades 

11:59:58 P.M. 

Renaissance in Europe; voyages of discovery from 

Europe and from Ming Dynasty China; emergence 

of the experimental method in science 

11:59:59 p.m. 

Widespread development of science and technology; 

emergence of a global culture; acquisition of the 

Now: 

means for self-destruction of the human species; 

The first second 

first steps in spacecraft planetary exploration and 

of New Year’s 

the search for extraterrestrial intelligence 

Day 


historically significant American, French, Russian and Chinese 
revolutions. 

The construction of such tables and calendars is inevitably 
humbling. It is disconcerting to find that in such a cosmic year 


THE COSMIC CALENDAR 


17 


the Earth does not condense out of interstellar matter until 
early September; dinosaurs emerge on Christmas Eve; flowers 
arise on December 28th; and men and women originate at 10:30 
p.m. on New Year’s Eve. All of recorded history occupies the last 
ten seconds of December 31; and the time from the waning of 
the Middle Ages to the present occupies little more than one 
second. But because I have arranged it that way, the first cosmic 
year has just ended. And despite the insignificance of the in- 
stant we have so far occupied in cosmic time, it is clear that 
what happens on and near Earth at the beginning of the second 
cosmic year will depend very much on the scientific wisdom and 
the distinctly human sensitivity of mankind. 



What the hammer? What the chain? 
In what furnace was thy brain? 

What the anvil? What dread grasp 
Dare its deadly terrors clasp? 

Wm. Blake 
“The Tyger” 


Of all animals, man has the largest brain in proportion 
to his size. 


Aristotle 
The Parts of Animals 



iological evolution has been accompanied by in- 
creasing complexity. The most complex organisms 
on Earth today contain substantially more stored 
information, both genetic and extragenetic, than 
the most complex organisms of, say, two hundred million years 
ago — which is only 5 percent of the history of life on the 
planet, five days ago on the Cosmic Calendar. The simplest 
organisms on Earth today have just as much evolutionary his- 
tory behind them as the most complex, and it may well be that 
the internal biochemistry of contemporary bacteria is more 
efficient than the internal biochemistry of the bacteria of three 
billion years ago. But the amount of genetic information in 
bacteria today is probably not vastly greater than that in their 
ancient bacterial ancestors. It is important to distinguish be- 
tween the amount of information and the quality of that 
information. 

The various biological forms are called taxa (singular, taxon). 
The largest taxonomic divisions distinguish between plants and 
animals, or between those organisms with poorly developed 
nuclei in their cells (such as bacteria and blue-green algae) 
and those with very clearly demarcated and elaborately archi- 
tectured nuclei ( such as protozoa or people ) . All organisms on 
the planet Earth, however, whether they have well-defined 
nuclei or not, have chromosomes, which contain the genetic 
material passed on from generation to generation. In all organ- 
isms the hereditary molecules are nucleic acids. With a few 
unimportant exceptions, the hereditary nucleic acid is always 
the molecule called DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). Much finer 




22 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


divisions among various sorts of plants and animals, down to 

species, subspecies and races, can also be described as separate 
taxa. 

A species is a group that can produce fertile offspring by 
crosses within but not outside itself. The mating of different 
breeds of dogs yields puppies which, when grown, will be 
reproductively competent dogs. But crosses between species — 
even species as similar as donkeys and horses — produce infertile 
offspring (in this case, mules). Donkeys and horses are there- 
fore categorized as separate species. Viable but infertile matings 
of more widely separated species — for example, lions and 
tigers— sometimes occur, and if, rarely, the offspring are fertile, 
this indicates only that the definition of species is a little fuzzy. 
All human beings are members of the same species, Homo 
sapiens, which means, in optimistic Latin, “Man, the wise.” Our 
probable ancestors, Homo erectus and Homo habilis — now 
extinct— are classified as of the same genus (Homo) but of 
different species, although no one (at least lately) has at- 
tempted the appropriate experiments to see if crosses of them 
with us would produce fertile offspring. 

In earlier times it was widely held that offspring could be 
produced by crosses between extremely different organisms. 
The Minotaur whom Theseus slew was said to be the result of 
a mating between a bull and a woman. And the Roman his- 
torian Pliny suggested that the ostrich, then newly discovered, 
was the result of a cross between a giraffe and a gnat. (It 
would, I suppose, have to be a female giraffe and a male gnat. ) 
In practice there must be many such crosses which have not 
been attempted because of a certain understandable lack of 
motivation. 

The chart that appears on page 26 will be referred to re- 
peatedly in this chapter. The solid curve on it shows the times 
of earliest emergence of various major taxa. Many more taxa 
exist, of course, than are shown by the few points in the figure. 
But the curve is representative of the much denser array of 
points that would be necessary to characterize the tens of 


GENES AND BRAINS 


*3 


millions of separate taxa which have emerged during the his- 
tory of life on our planet. The major taxa, which have evolved 
most recently, are by and large the most complicated. 

Some notion of the complexity of an organism can be ob- 
tained merely by considering its behavior — that is, the number 
of different functions it is called upon to perform in its life- 
time. But complexity can also be judged by the minimum in- 
formation content in the organism’s genetic material. A typical 
human chromosome has one very long DNA molecule wound 
into coils, so that the space it occupies is very much smaller 
than it would be if it were unraveled. This DNA molecule is 
composed of smaller building blocks, a little like the rungs and 
sides of a rope ladder. These blocks are called nucleotides and 
come in four varieties. The language of life, our hereditary 
information, is determined by the sequence of the four different 
sorts of nucleotides. We might say that the language of hered- 
ity is written in an alphabet of only four letters. 

But the book of life is very rich; a typical chromosomal DNA 
molecule in a human being is composed of about five billion 
pairs of nucleotides. The genetic instructions of all the other 
taxa on Earth are written in the same language, with the same 
code book. Indeed, this shared genetic language is one line of 
evidence that all the organisms on Earth are descended from 
a single ancestor, a single instance of the origin of life some 
four billion years ago. 

The information content of any message is usually described 
in units called bits, which is short for “binary digits.” The 
simplest arithmetical scheme uses not ten digits (as we do 
because of the evolutionary accident that we have ten fingers) 
but only two, o and 1. Thus any sufficiently crisp question can 
be answered by a single binary digit — o or 1, yes or no. If the 
genetic code were written in a language of two letters rather 
than four letters, the number of bits in a DNA molecule would 
equal twice the number of nucleotide pairs. But since there are 
four different kinds of nucleotides, the number of bits of 
information in DNA is four times the number of nucleotide 


24 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


pairs. Thus if a single chromosome has five billion (5 X 10 9 ) 
nucleotides, it contains twenty billion ( 2 X 10 10 ) bits of infor- 
mation. [A symbol such as 10 9 merely indicates a one followed 
by a certain number of zeroes — in this case, nine of them.] 

How much information is twenty billion bits? What would 
be its equivalent, if it were written down in an ordinary printed 
book in a modern human language? Alphabetical human lan- 
guages characteristically have twenty to forty letters plus one 
or two dozen numerals and punctuation marks; thus sixty-four 
alternative characters should suffice for most such languages. 
Since 2 a equals 64(2X2X2X2X2X2), it should take 
no more than six bits to specify a given character. We can 
think of this being done by a sort of game of “Twenty Ques- 
tions,” in which each answer corresponds to the investment of 
a single bit to a yes/no question. Suppose the character in 
question is the letter J. We might specify it by the following 
procedure: 

first question: Is it a letter (o) or some other character 

(1)? 

answer: A letter (o). 

second question: Is it in the first half (o) or the second 
half of the alphabet ( 1 ) ? 

answer : In the first half ( o ) . 

third question: Of the thirteen letters in the first half of 
the alphabet, is it in the first seven (o) or the second six 

(1)? 

answer: In the second six ( 1 ). 

fourth question: In the second six (H, I, J, K, L, M), is 
it in the first half ( o ) or the second half ( 1 ) ? 

answer: In the first half (o). 

fifth question: Of these letters H, I, J, is it II (o) or is it 
one of I and J ( 1 ) ? 

answer: It is one of I and J- ( 1 ) . 

SIXTH QUESTION : Is it I ( O ) Or J ( 1 ) ? 

ANSWER: It is J ( 1 ). 


GENES AND BRAINS 


25 


Specifying the letter J is therefore equivalent to the binary 
message, 001011. But it required not twenty questions but six, 
and it is in this sense that only six bits are required to specify 
a given letter. Therefore twenty billion bits are the equivalent 
of about three billion letters (2 X io 10 /6 = 3 X 10 9 ). If there 
are approximately six letters in an average word, the informa- 
tion content of a human chromosome corresponds to about 
five hundred million words (3 X io 9 /6 = 5 X 10 8 ). If there 
are about three hundred words on an ordinary page of printed 
type, this corresponds to about two million pages ( 5 X io 8 /3 X 
10 2 = 2 X 10 8 ). If a typical book contains five hundred such 
pages, the information content of a single human chromosome 
corresponds to some four thousand volumes (2 X 10 8 / 5 X 10 2 = 
4 X 10 3 ). It is clear, then, that the sequence of rungs on our 
DNA ladders represents an enormous library of information. 
It is equally clear that so rich a library is required to specify as 
exquisitely constructed and intricately functioning an object as 
a human being. Simple organisms have less complexity and 
less to do, and therefore require a smaller amount of genetic 
information. The Viking landers that put down on Mars in 
1976 each had preprogrammed instructions in their computers 
amounting to a few million bits. Thus Viking had slightly more 
“genetic information” than a bacterium, but significantly less 
than an alga. 

The chart on page 26 also shows the minimum amount of 
genetic information in the DNA of various taxa. The amount 
shown for mammals is less than for human beings, because 
most mammals have less genetic information than human beings 
do. Within certain taxa — for example, the amphibians — the 
amount of genetic information varies wildly from species to 
species, and it is thought that much of this DNA may be re- 
dundant or functionless. This is the reason that the chart dis- 
plays the minimum amount of DNA for a given taxon. 

We see from the chart that there was a striking improvement 
in the information content of organisms on Earth some three 
billion years ago, and a slow increase in the amount of genetic 


a6 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


10 12 


E 

H 



3xl0 4 3xl0 5 3xl0 6 3xl0 7 3x10 s 3xl0 9 3xl0 10 3x10“ 3xl0 12 3xl0 13 

N umber of bits of information 


The evolution of information content in genes and brains during the his- 
tory of life on Earth. The solid curve, which goes with the filled circles, 
represents the number of bits of information contained in the genes of 
various taxa, whose rough time of origin in the geological record is also 
shown. Because of variations in the amount of DNA per cell for certain 
taxa, only the minimum information content for a given taxon is shown, 
the data being taken from the work of Britten and Davidson (ig6g). The 
dashed curve, which goes with the open circles, is an approximate 
estimate of the evolution in the amount of information in the brains and 
nervous systems of these same organisms. The information in the brains 
of amphibians and still lower animals are off the left edge of the figure. 
The number of bits of information in the genetic material of viruses is 
shown, but it is not clear that viruses originated several billions of years 
ago. It is possible that viruses have evolved more recently, by loss of 
function, from bacteria or other more elaborate organisms. If the extraso- 
matic information of human beings were included ( libraries , etc.), that 
point would be far off the lower right edge of the chart. 


information thereafter. We also see that if more than some 
tens of billions (several times io 10 ) of bits of information are 
necessary for human survival, extragenetic systems will have to 
provide them: the rate of development of genetic systems is so 


GENES AND BRAINS 


27 


slow that no source of such additional biological information 
can be sought in the DNA. 

The raw materials of evolution are mutations, inheritable 
changes in the particular nucleotide sequences that make up 
the hereditary instructions in the DNA molecule. Mutations 
are caused by radioactivity in the environment, by cosmic rays 
from space, or, as often happens, randomly — by spontaneous 
rearrangements of the nucleotides which statistically must occur 
every now and then. Chemical bonds spontaneously break. 
Mutations are also to some extent controlled by the organism 
itself. Organisms have the ability to repair certain classes of 
structural damage done to their DNA. There are, for example, 
molecules which patrol the DNA for damage; when a particu- 
larly egregious alteration in the DNA is discovered, it is snipped 
out by a kind of molecular scissors, and the DNA put right. 
But such repair is not and must not be perfectly efficient: 
mutations are required for evolution. A mutation in a DNA 
molecule within a chromosome of a skin cell in my index finger 
has no influence on heredity. Fingers are not involved, at least 
directly, in the propagation of the species. What counts are 
mutations in the gametes, the eggs and sperm cells, which are 
the agents of sexual reproduction. 

Accidentally useful mutations provide the working material 
for biological evolution — as, for example, a mutation for 
melanin in certain moths, which changes their color from white 
to black. Such moths commonly rest on English birch trees, 
where their white coloration provides protective camouflage. 
Under these conditions, the melanin mutation is not an ad- 
vantage — the dark moths are starkly visible and are eaten by 
birds; the mutation is selected against. But when the Industrial 
Revolution began to cover the birch bark with soot, the situa- 
tion was reversed, and only moths with the melanin mutation 
survived. Then the mutation is selected for, and, in time, almost 
all the moths are dark, passing this inheritable change on to 
future generations. There are still occasional reverse mutations 
eliminating the melanin adaptation, which would be useful for 
the moths were English industrial pollution to be controlled. 


z8 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


Note that in all this interaction between mutation and natural 
selection, no moth is making a conscious effort to adapt to a 
changed environment. The process is random and statistical. 

Large organisms such as human beings average about one 
mutation per ten gametes — that is, there is a 10 percent chance 
that any given sperm or egg cell produced will have a new and 
inheritable change in the genetic instructions that determine 
the makeup of the next generation. These mutations occur at 
random and are almost uniformly harmful — it is rare that a 
precision machine is improved by a random change in the 
instructions for making it. 

Most of these mutations are also recessive — they do not 
manifest themselves immediately. Nevertheless, there is already 
such a high mutation rate that, as several biologists have sug- 
gested, a larger complement of genetic DNA would bring about 
unacceptably high mutation rates: too much would go wrong 
too often it we had more genes . 0 If this is true, there must be a 
practical upper limit to the amount of genetic information that 
the DNA of larger organisms can accommodate. Thus large and 
complex organisms, by the mere fact of their existence, have to 
have substantial resources of extragenetic information. That 
information is contained, in all higher animals except Man, al- 
most exclusively in the brain. 


What is the information content of the brain? Let us con- 
sider two opposite and extreme poles of opinion on brain func- 
tion. In one view, the brain, or at least its outer layers, the 
cerebral cortex, is equipotent: any part of it may substitute 
for any other part, and there is no localization of function. In 

“To some extent the mutation rate is itself controlled by natural selec- 
tion, as in our example of a “molecular scissors.” But there is likely to be 
an irreducible minimum mutation rate ( 1 ) in order to produce enough 
genetic experiments for natural selection to operate on, and (2) as an 
equilibrium between mutations produced, say, by cosmic rays and the 
most efficient possible cellular repair mechanisms. 


GENES AND BRAINS 


29 


the other view, the brain is completely hard-wired: specific 
cognitive functions are localized in particular places in the 
brain. Computer design suggests that the truth lies somewhere 
between these two extremes. On the one hand, any nonmystical 
view of brain function must connect physiology with anatomy; 
particular brain functions must be tied to particular neural 
patterns or other brain architecture. On the other hand, to 
assure accuracy and protect against accident we would expect 
natural selection to have evolved substantial redundancy in 
brain function. This is also to be expected from the evolu- 
tionary path that it is most likely the brain followed. 

The redundancy of memory storage was clearly demonstrated 
by Karl Lashley, a Harvard psychoneurologist, who surgically 
removed (extirpated) significant fractions of the cerebral cor- 
tex of rats without noticeably affecting their recollection of 
previously learned behavior on how to run mazes. From such 
experiments it is clear that the same memory must be localized 
in many different places in the brain, and we now know that 
some memories are funneled between the left and right cere- 
bral hemispheres by a conduit called the corpus callosum. 

Lashley also reported no apparent change in the general 
behavior of a rat when significant fractions — say, 10 percent — 
of its brain were removed. But no one asked the rat its opinion. 
To investigate this question properly would require a detailed 
study of rat social, foraging, and predator-evasion behavior. 
There are many conceivable behavioral changes resulting from 
such extirpations that might not be immediately obvious to 
the casual scientist but that might be of considerable signifi- 
cance to the rat — such as the amount of post-extirpation in- 
terest an attractive rat of the opposite sex now elicits, or the 
degree of disinterest now evinced by the presence of a stalking 
cat." 

“Incidentally, as a test of the influence of animated cartoons on 
American life, try rereading this paragraph with the word “rat” replaced 
everywhere by “mouse,” and see if your sympathy for the surgically in- 
vaded and misunderstood beast suddenly increases. 


3« 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


It is sometimes argued that cuts or lesions in significant parts 
of the cerebral cortex in humans — as by bilateral prefrontal 
lobotomy or by an accident — have little effect on behavior. 
But some sorts of human behavior are not very apparent from 
the outside, or even from the inside. There are human percep- 
tions and activities that may occur only rarely, such as crea- 
tivity. The association of ideas involved in acts — even small 
ones — of creative genius seems to imply substantial invest- 
ments of brain resources. These creative acts indeed char- 
acterize our entire civilization and mankind as a species. Yet 
in many people they occur only rarely, and their absence may 
be missed by neither the brain-damaged subject nor the in- 
quiring physician. 

While substantial redundancy in brain function is inevitable, 
the strong equipotent hypothesis is almost certainly wrong, 
and most contemporary neurophysiologists have rejected it. On 
the other hand, a weaker equipotent hypothesis — holding, for 
example, that memory is a function of the cerebral cortex as a 
whole — is not so readily dismissable, although it is testable, 
as we shall see. 

There is a popular contention that half or more of the brain 
is unused. From an evolutionary point of view this would be 
quite extraordinary: why should it have evolved if it had no 
function? But actually the statement is made on very little evi- 
dence. Again, it is deduced from the finding that many lesions 
of the brain, generally of the cerebral cortex, have no apparent 
effect on behavior. This view does not take into account ( 1) 
the possibility of redundant function; and (2) the fact that 
some human behavior is subtle. For example, lesions in the 
right hemisphere of the cerebral cortex may lead to impair- 
ments in thought and action, but in the nonverbal realm, 
which is, by definition, difficult for the patient or the physician 
to describe. 

There is also considerable evidence for localization of brain 
function. Specific brain sites below the cerebral cortex have 
been found to be concerned with appetite, balance, thermal 


GENES AND BRAINS 


31 


regulation, the circulation of the blood, precision movements 
and breathing. A classic study on higher brain function is 
the work of the Canadian neurosurgeon, Wilder Penfield, on 
the electrical stimulation of various parts of the cerebral cortex, 
generally in attempts to relieve symptoms of a disease such as 
psychomotor epilepsy. Patients reported a snatch of memory, 
a smell from the past, a sound or color trace — all elicited by a 
small electrical current at a particular site in the brain. 

In a typical case, a patient might hear an orchestral composi- 
tion in full detail when current flowed through Penfield’s elec- 
trode to the patient’s cortex, exposed after a craniotomy. If 
Penfield indicated to the patient — who typically is fully con- 
scious during such procedures — that he was stimulating the 
cortex when he was not, invariably the patient would report 
no memory trace at that moment. But when, without notice, 
a current would flow through the electrode into the cortex, a 
memory trace would begin or continue. A patient might report 
a feeling tone, or a sense of familiarity, or a full retrieval of an 
experience of many years previous playing back in his mind, 
simultaneously but in no conflict with his awareness of being 
in an operating room conversing with a physician. While some 
patients described these flashbacks as “little dreams,” they con- 
tained none of the characteristic symbolism of dream material. 
These experiences have been reported almost exclusively by 
epileptics, and it is possible, although it has by no means been 
demonstrated, that non-epileptics are, under similar circum- 
stances, subject to comparable perceptual reminiscences. 

In one case of electrical stimulation of the occipital lobe, 
which is concerned with vision, the patient reported seeing a 
fluttering butterfly of such compelling reality that he stretched 
out his hand from the operating table to catch it. In an identical 
experiment performed on an ape, the animal peered intently, 
as if at an object before him, made a swift catching motion with 
his right hand, and then examined, in apparent bewilderment, 
his empty fist. 

Painless electrical stimulation of at least some human cere- 


3 Z 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


bral cortices elicits cascades of memories of particular events. 
But removal of the brain tissue in contact with the electrode 
does not erase the memory. It is difficult to resist the conclusion 
that at least in humans memories are stored somewhere in the 
cerebral cortex, waiting for the brain to retrieve them by 
electrical impulses — which, of course, are ordinarily generated 
within the brain itself. 


If memory is a function of the cerebral cortex as a whole — 
a kind of dynamic reverberation or electrical standing wave 
pattern of the constituent parts, rather than stored statically 
in separate brain components — this would explain the survival 
of memory after significant brain damage. The evidence, how- 
ever, points in the other direction: In experiments performed 
by the American neurophysiologist Ralph Gerard at the Uni- 
versity of Michigan, hamsters were taught to run a simple maze 
and then chilled almost to the freezing point in a refrigerator, 
a kind of induced hibernation. The temperatures were so low 
that all detectable electrical activity in the animals’ brains 
ceased. If the dynamic view of memory were true, the experi- 
ment should have wiped out all memory of successful maze- 
running. Instead, after thawing, the hamsters remembered. 
Memory seems to be localized in specific sites in the brain, and 
the survival of memories after massive brain lesions must be 
the result of redundant storage of static memory traces in 
various locales. 

Penfield, extending the findings of previous researchers, also 
uncovered a remarkable localization of function in the motor 
cortex. Certain parts of the outer layers of our brain are re- 
sponsible for sending signals to or receiving signals from 
specific parts of the body. A version of Penfield’s maps of the 
sensory and motor cortices appear on pages 34 and 35. It re- 
flects in an engaging way the Relative importance of various 
parts of our body. The enormous amount of brain area com- 
mitted to the fingers — particularly the thumb — and to the 


GENES AND BRAINS 


33 


mouth and the organs of speech corresponds precisely to what 
in human physiology, through human behavior, has set us 
apart from most of the other animals. Our learning and our 
culture would never have developed without speech; our tech- 
nology and our monuments would never have evolved without 
hands. In a way, the map of the motor cortex is an accurate 
portrait of our humanity. 

But the evidence for localization of function is now much 
stronger even than this. In an elegant set of experiments, David 
Hubei of Harvard Medical School discovered the existence of 
networks of particular brain cells that respond selectively to 
lines perceived by the eye in different orientations. There are 
cells for horizontal, and cells for vertical, and cells for diag- 
onal, each of which is stimulated only -if lines of the appropriate 
orientation are perceived. At least some beginnings of abstract 
thought have thereby been traced to the cells of the brain. 


The existence of specific brain areas dealing with particular 
cognitive, sensory or motor functions implies that there need not 
be any perfect correlation between brain mass and intelligence; 
some parts of the brain are clearly more important than others. 
Among the most massive human brains on record are those of 
Oliver Cromwell, Ivan Turgenev and Lord Byron, all of whom 
were smart but no Albert Einsteins. Einstein’s brain, on the 
other hand, was not remarkably large. Anatole France, who 
was brighter than many, had a brain half the size of Byron’s. 
The human baby is bom with an exceptionally high ratio of 
brain mass to body mass (about 12 percent); and the brain, 
particularly the cerebral cortex, continues to grow rapidly in 
the first three years of life— the period of most rapid learn- 
ing. By age six, the mass of the brain is 90 percent of its adult 
value. The average mass of the brain of contemporary men is 
about 1,375 grams, almost three pounds. Since the density of 
the brain, like that of all body tissues, is about that of water 
(one gram per cubic centimeter), the volume of such a brain 


34 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


is 1,375 Cubic centimeters, a little under a liter and a half. 
( One cubic centimeter is about the volume of an adult human 
navel. ) 

But the brain of a contemporary woman is about 150 cubic 
centimeters smaller. When cultural and child-rearing biases 
are taken into account, there is no clear evidence of overall 
differences in intelligence between the sexes. Therefore, brain- 

Sensory and motor homunculi, after Penfield. These are two maps of the 
specialization of function in the cerebral cortex. The distorted manne- 
quins are maps of how much attention is given in the cortex to various 
parts of the body; the larger the body part shown, the more important 



GENES AND BRAINS 


35 


mass differences of 150 grams in humans must be unimportant. 
Comparable differences in brain mass exist among adults of 
different human races ( Orientals, on the average, have slightly 
larger brains than whites); since no differences in intelligence 
under similarly controlled conditions have been demonstrated 
there, the same conclusion follows. And the gap between the 
sizes of the brains of Lord Byron (2,200 grams) and Anatole 


it is. At left is a map of the somatic sensory area, which receives neural 
information from the parts of the body shown; at right is a corresponding 
map for the transmission of impulses from brain to body. 


Copyright © 1948 by Scientific American, Inc. 



'Toes 


Vs 

Index / 

Thumb ' / \ 

Neck 7 / 'CS 
Brow' / 

Eyelid &amp; eyeball ' /-v 

Face / s 
Lips 


Jaw 

Tongue^ 
Swallowing 

&gt;r 


jr 


MOTOR 
HOMUNCULUS 




36 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


France ( 1,100 grams) suggests that, in this range, differences of 
many hundreds of grams may be functionally unimportant. 

On the other hand, adult human microcephalies, who are 
bom with tiny brains, have vast losses in cognitive abilities; 
their typical brain masses are between 450 and 900 grams. A 
normal newborn child has a typical brain mass of 350 grams; a 
one-year-old, about 500 grams. It is clear that, as we consider 
smaller and smaller brain masses, there comes a point where 
the brain mass is so tiny that its function is severely im- 
paired, compared to normal adult human brain function. 

Moreover, there is a statistical correlation between brain 
mass or size and intelligence in human beings. The relation- 
ship is not one-to-one, as the Byron— France comparison clearly 
shows. We cannot tell a person’s intelligence in any given case 
by measuring his or her brain size. However, as the American 
evolutionary biologist Leigh van Valen of the University of 
Chicago has shown, the available data suggest a fairly good 
correlation, on the average, between brain size and intelligence. 
Does this mean that brain size in some sense causes intelligence? 
Might it not be, for example, that malnutrition, particularly 
in utero and in infancy, leads to both small brain size and low 
intelligence, without the one causing the other? Van Valen 
points out that the correlation between brain size and intelli- 
gence is much better than the correlation between intelligence 
and stature or adult body weight, which are known to be 
influenced by malnutrition, and there is no doubt that mal- 
nutrition can lower intelligence. Thus beyond such effects, there 
appears to be an extent to which larger absolute brain size tends 
to produce higher intelligence. 

In exploring new intellectual territory, physicists have found 
it useful to make order-of-magnitude estimates. These are 
rough calculations that block out the problem and serve as 
guides for future studies. They do not pretend to be highly 
accurate. In the question of the connection between brain size 
and intelligence, it is clearly far beyond present scientific abilities 
to perform a census of the function of every cubic centimeter 


GENES AND BRAINS 


37 


of the brain. But might there not be some rough and approxi- 
mate way in which to connect brain mass with intelligence? 

The difference in brain mass between the sexes is of interest 
in precisely this context, because women are systematically 
smaller in size and have a lower body mass than men. With 
less body to control, might not a smaller brain mass be 
adequate? This suggests that a better measure of intelligence 
than the absolute value of the mass of a brain is the ratio of 
the mass of the brain to the total mass of the organism. 

The chart on page 38 shows the brain masses and body 
masses of various animals. There is a remarkable separation of 
fish and reptiles from birds and mammals. For a given body 
mass or weight, mammals have consistently higher brain mass. 
The brains of mammals are ten to one hundred times more 
massive than the brains of contemporary reptiles of compar- 
able size. The discrepancy between mammals and dinosaurs 
is even more striking. These are stunningly large and com- 
pletely systematic differences. Since we are mammals, we prob- 
ably have some prejudices about the relative intelligence of 
mammals and reptiles; but I think the evidence is quite com- 
pelling that mammals are indeed systematically much more 
intelligent than reptiles. (Also shown is an intriguing excep- 
tion: a small ostrich-like theropod class of dinosaurs from the 
late Cretaceous Period, whose ratio of brain to body mass 
places them just within the regional diagram otherwise re- 
stricted to large birds and the less intelligent mammals. It 
would be interesting to know much more about these creatures, 
which have been studied by Dale Russell, chief of the Palaeon- 
tology Division of the National Museums of Canada. ) We also 
see from the chart on page 38 that the primates, a taxon that 
includes man, are separated, but less systematically, from the 
rest of the mammals; primate brains are on the average more 
massive by a factor of about two to twenty than those of non- 
primate mammals of the same body mass. 

When we look more closely at this chart, isolating a num- 
ber of particular animals, we see the results on page 39. Of all 


3» 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 



A scatter diagram of brain mass versus body mass for primates, mammals, 
birds, fish, reptiles, and dinosaurs. The diagram has been adapted from 
the work of Jerison (1973), with some points added for the dinosaurs 
and now-extinct members of the family of man. 


the organisms shown, the beast with the largest brain mass for 
its body weight is a creature called Homo sapiens. Next in such 
a ranking are the dolphins.* Again I do not think it is chau- 
vinistic to conclude from evidence on their behavior that 
humans and dolphins are at least among the most intelligent 
organisms on Earth. 

“By the criterion of brain mass to body mass, sharks are the smartest of 
the fishes, which is consistent with their ecological niche — predators have 
to be brighter than plankton browsers. Both in their increasing ratio of 
brain to body mass and in the development of coordinating centers in the 
three principal components of their brains, sharks have evolved in a 
manner curiously parallel to the evolution of higher vertebrates on the 
land. 


GENES AND BRAINS 


The importance of this ratio of brain to body mass had been 
realized even by Aristotle. Its principal modern exponent has 
been Harry Jerison, a neuropsychiatrist at the University of 
California at Los Angeles. Jerison points out that some excep- 
tions exist to our correlation — e.g., the European pygmy shrew 
has a brain mass of 100 milligrams in a 4.7 gram body, which 
gives it a mass ratio in the human range. But we cannot expect 
the correlation of mass ratio with intelligence to apply to the 
smallest animals, because the simplest “housekeeping” func- 
tions of the brain must require some minimum brain mass. 

The brain mass of a mature sperm whale, a close relative of 
the dolphin, is almost 9,000 grams, six and a half times that of 
the average man. It is unusual in total brain mass, not (com- 
pare with the figure below) in ratio of brain to body weight. 
Yet the largest dinosaurs had brain weights about 1 percent 


A closer look at some of the points in the diagram on page 38. Saur- 
ornithoid is the ostrich-like dinosaur mentioned in the text. 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


that of the sperm whale. What does the whale do with so 
massive a brain? Are there thoughts, insights, arts, sciences and 
legends of the sperm whale? 

The criterion of brain mass to body mass, which involves no 
considerations of behavior, appears to provide a very useful 
index of the relative intelligence of quite different animals. It 
is what a physicist might describe as an acceptable first approx- 
imation. ( Note for future reference that the Australopithecines, 
who were either ancestral to man or at least close collateral 
relatives, also had a large brain mass for their body weight; 
this has been determined by making casts of fossil braincases.) 
I wonder if the unaccountable general appeal of babies and 
other small mammals — with relatively large heads compared to 
adults of the same species — derives from our unconscious 
awareness of the importance of brain to body mass ratios. 

The data so far in this discussion suggest that the evolution 
of mammals from reptiles over two hundred million years ago 
was accompanied by a major increase in relative brain size and 
intelligence; and that the evolution of human beings from 
nonhuman primates a few million years ago was accompanied 
by an even more striking development of the brain. 


The human brain (apart from the cerebellum, which does 
not seem to be involved in cognitive functions ) contains about 
ten billion switching elements called neurons. ( The cerebellum, 
which lies beneath the cerebral cortex, toward the back of the 
head, contains roughly another ten billion neurons. ) The elec- 
trical currents generated by and through the neurons or nerve 
cells were the means by which the Italian anatomist Luigi 
Galvani discovered electricity. Galvani had found that elec- 
trical impulses could be conducted to the legs of frogs, which 
dutifully twitched; and the idea became popular that animal 
motion ( “animation” ) was in its deepest sense caused by electric- 
ity. This is at best a partial truth; electrical impulses transmitted 
along nerve fibers do, through neurochemical intermediaries, 


GENES AND BRAINS 


41 


initiate such movements as the articulation of limbs, but the 
impulses are generated in the brain. Nevertheless, the modern 
science of electricity and the electrical and electronic industries 
all trace their origins to eighteenth-century experiments on the 
electrical stimulation of twitches in frogs. 

Only a few decades after Galvani, a group of literary English- 
persons, immobilized in the Alps by inclement weather, set 
themselves a competition to write a fictional work of consum- 
mate horror. One of them, Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, penned 
the now-famous tale of Dr. Frankenstein’s monster, who is 
brought to life by the application of massive electrical currents. 
Electrical devices have been a mainstay of gothic novels and 
horror films ever since. The essential idea is Galvani’s and is 
fallacious, but the concept has insinuated itself into many 
Western languages — as, for example, when I am galvanized 
into writing this book. 

Most neurobiologists believe that the neurons are the active 
elements in brain function, although there is evidence that 
some specific memories and other cognitive functions may be 
contained in particular molecules in the brain, such as RNA 
or small proteins. For every neuron in the brain there are 
roughly ten glial cells (from the Greek word for glue), which 
provide the scaffolding for the neuronal architecture. An aver- 
age neuron in a human brain has between 1,000 and 10,000 
synapses or links with adjacent neurons. (Many spinal-cord 
neurons seem to have about 10,000 synapses, and the so-called 
Purkinje cells of the cerebellum may have still more. The 
number of links for neurons in the cortex is probably less 
than 10,000.) If each synapse responds by a single yes-or-no 
answer to an elementary question, as is true of the switching 
elements in electronic computers, the maximum number of 
yes/no answers or bits of information that the brain could 
contain is about 10 10 X 10 3 = 10 13 , or 10 trillion bits (or 100 
trillion = 10 14 bits if we had used 10 4 synapses per neuron). 
Some of these synapses must contain the same information as 
is contained in other synapses; some must be concerned with 


42 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


motor and other noncognitive functions; and some may be 
merely blank, a buffer waiting for the new day’s information to 
flutter through. 

If each human brain had only one synapse — corresponding 
to a monumental stupidity — we would be capable of only two 
mental states. If we had two synapses, then 2 2 = 4 states; 
three synapses, then 2 3 = 8 states, and, in general, for N 
synapses, 2 N states. But the human brain is characterized by 
some 10 13 synapses. Thus the number of different states of a 
human brain is 2 raised to this power — i.e., multiplied by itself 
ten trillion times. This is an unimaginably large number, far 
greater, for example, than the total number of elementary 
particles (electrons and protons) in the entire universe, which 
is much less than 2 raised to the power 10 3 . It is because of 
this immense number of functionally different configurations of 
the human brain that no two humans, even identical twins 
raised together, can ever be really very much alike. These 
enormous numbers may also explain something of the unpre- 
dictability of human behavior and those moments when we 
surprise even ourselves by what we do. Indeed, in the face of 
these numbers, the wonder is that there are any regularities 
at all in human behavior. The answer must be that all possible 
brain states are by no means occupied; there must be an 
enormous number of mental configurations that have never 
been entered or even glimpsed by any human being in the 
history of mankind. From this perspective, each human being 
is truly rare and different and the sanctity of individual human 
lives is a plausible ethical consequence. 

In recent years it has become clear that there are electrical 
microcircuits in the brain. In these microcircuits the constituent 
neurons are capable of a much wider range of responses than 
the simple “yes” or “no” of the switching elements in electronic 
computers. The microcircuits are very small in size (typical 
dimensions are about 1/10,000 of a centimeter) and thus able 
to process data very rapidly. They respond to about 1/ 100th 
of the voltage necessary to stimulate ordinary neurons, and 


GENES AND BRAINS 


43 


are therefore capable of much finer and subtler responses. Such 
microcircuits seem to increase in abundance in a manner con- 
sistent with our usual notions about the complexity of an ani- 
mal, reaching their greatest proliferation in both absolute and 
relative terms in human beings. They also develop late in 
human embryology. The existence of such microcircuits sug- 
gests that intelligence may be the result not only of high brain- 
to-body-mass ratios but also of an abundance of specialized 
switching elements in the brain. Microcircuits make the num- 
ber of possible brain states even greater than we calculated in 
the previous paragraph, and so enhance still farther the aston- 
ishing uniqueness of the individual human brain. 


We can approach the question of the information content of 
the human brain in a quite different way — introspectively. Try 
to imagine some visual memory, say from your childhood. 
Look at it very closely in your mind’s eye. Imagine it is com- 
posed of a set of fine dots like a newspaper wirephoto. Each dot 
has a certain color and brightness. You must now ask how many 
bits of information are necessary to characterize the color and 
brightness of each dot; how many dots make up the recalled 
picture; and how long it takes to recall all the details of the 
picture in the eye of the mind. In this retrospective, you focus 
on a very small part of the picture at any one time; your field 
of view is quite limited. When you put in all of these numbers, 
you come out with a rate of information processing by the 
brain, in bits per second. When I do such a calculation, I come 
out with a peak processing rate of about 5,000 bits per second.* 

* Horizon to horizon comprises an angle of 180 degrees in a flat place. 
The moon is 0.5 degrees in diameter. I know I can see detail on it, 
perhaps twelve picture elements across. Thus my eye can resolve about 
0.5/ 12 = 0.04 degrees. Anything smaller than this is too small for me 
to see. The instantaneous field of view in my mind’s eye, as well as in 
my real eye, seems to be something like 2 degrees on a side. Thus the 
little square picture I can see at any given moment contains about 


44 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


Most commonly such visual recollections concentrate on 
the edges of forms and sharp changes from bright to dark, and 
not on the configuration of areas of largely neutral brightness. 
The frog, for example, sees with a very strong bias towards 
brightness gradients. However, there is considerable evidence 
that detailed memory of interiors and not just edges of forms 
is reasonably common. Perhaps the most striking case is an 
experiment with humans on stereo reconstruction of a three- 
dimensional image, using a pattern recalled for one eye and 
a pattern being viewed for the other. The fusion of images in 
this anaglyph requires a memory of 10,000 picture elements. 

But I am not recollecting visual images all my waking hours, 
nor am I continuously subjecting people and objects to intense 
and careful scrutiny. I am doing that perhaps a small percent 
of the time. My other information channels — auditory, tactile, 
olfactory and gustatory — are involved with much lower transfer 
rates. I conclude that the average rate of data processing by 
my brain is about ( 5000/ 50 ) = 100 bits per second. Over 
sixty years, that corresponds to 2 X 10 11 or 200 billion total bits 
committed to visual and other memory if I have perfect recall. 
This is less than, but not unreasonably less than, the number 
of synapses or neural connections ( since the brain has more to 
do than just remember ) and suggests that neurons are indeed 
the main switching elements in brain function. 

(2/0.04) 2 = 2&gt;5°o picture elements, corresponding to the wirephoto 
dots. To characterize all possible shades of gray and colors of such dots 
requires about 20 bits per picture element. Thus a description of my 
little picture requires 2,500 X 20 or about 50,000 bits. But the act of 
scanning the picture takes about 10 seconds, and thus my sensory data 
processing rate is probably not much larger than 50,000/10 = 5,000 bits 
per second. For comparison, the Viking lander cameras, which also have 
a 0.04 degree resolution, have only six bits per picture element to char- 
acterize brightness, and can transmit these directly to Earth by radio at 
500 bits per second. The neurons of the brain generate about 25 watts 
of power, barely enough to turn on a small incandescent light. The 
Viking lander transmits radio messages and performs all its other func- 
tions with a total power of about 50 watts. 


GENES AND BRAINS 


45 


A remarkable series of experiments on brain changes during 
learning has been performed by the American psychologist Mark 
Rosenzweig and his colleagues at the University of California 
at Berkeley. They maintained two different populations of 
laboratory rats — one in a dull, repetitive, impoverished environ- 
ment; the other in a variegated, lively, enriched environment. 
The latter group displayed a striking increase in the mass 
and thickness of the cerebral cortex, as well as accompanying 
changes in brain chemistry. These increases occurred in mature 
as well as in young animals. Such experiments demonstrate 
that physiological changes accompany intellectual experience 
and show how plasticity can be controlled anatomically. Since 
a more massive cerebral cortex may make future learning easier, 
the importance of enriched environments in childhood is clearly 
drawn. 

This would mean that new learning corresponds to the gen- 
eration of new synapses or the activation of moribund old ones, 
and some preliminary evidence consistent with this view has 
been obtained by the American neuroanatomist William Green- 
ough of the University of Illinois and his co-workers. They have 
found that after several weeks of learning new tasks in labora- 
tory contexts, rats develop the kind of new neural branches in 
their cortices that form synapses. Other rats, handled similarly 
but given no comparable education, exhibit no such neuro- 
anatomical novelties. The construction of new synapses re- 
quires the synthesis of protein and RNA molecules. There is a 
great deal of evidence showing that these molecules are pro- 
duced in the brain during learning, and some scientists have 
suggested that the learning is contained within brain proteins 
or RNA. But it seems more likely that the new information is 
contained in the neurons, which are in turn constructed of 
proteins and RNA. 

How densely packed is the information stored in the brain? 
A typical information density during the operation of a modern 
computer is about a million bits per cubic centimeter. This is 


46 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


the total information content of the computer, divided by its 
volume. The human brain contains, as we have said, about io 13 
bits in a little more than io 3 cubic centimeters, for an informa- 
tion content of io 13 /io 3 = io 10 , about ten billion bits per cubic 
centimeter; the brain is therefore ten thousand times more 
densely packed with information than is a computer, although 
the computer is much larger. Put another way, a modern com- 
puter able to process the information in the human brain would 
have to be about ten thousand times larger in volume than the 
human brain. On the other hand, modern electronic computers 
are capable of processing information at a rate of io 18 to io 17 
bits per second, compared to a peak rate ten billion times 
slower in the brain. The brain must be extraordinarily cleverly 
packaged and “wired,” with such a small total information 
content and so low a processing rate, to be able to do so many 
significant tasks so much better than the best computer. 

The number of neurons in an animal brain does not double 
as the brain volume itself doubles. It increases more slowly. A 
human brain with a volume of about 1,375 cubic centimeters 
contains, as we have said, apart from the cerebellum about ten 
billion neurons and some ten trillion bits. In a laboratory at 
the National Institute of Mental Health near Bethesda, Mary- 
land, I recently held in my hand a rabbit brain. It had a 
volume of perhaps thirty cubic centimeters, the size of an 
average radish, corresponding to a few hundred million neurons 
and some hundred billion bits — which controlled, among other 
things, the munching of lettuce, the twitchings of noses, and 
the sexual dalliances of grownup rabbits. 

Since animal taxa such as mammals, reptiles or amphibians 
contain members with very different brain sizes, we cannot 
give a reliable estimate of the number of neurons in the brain 
of a typical representative of each taxon. But we can estimate 
average values which I have done in the chart on p. 26 • The 
rough estimates there show that a human being has about a 
hundred times more bits of information in his brain than a 
rabbit does. I do not know that it means very much to say that 


GENES AND BRAINS 


47 


a human being is a hundred times smarter than a rabbit, but 
I am not certain that it is a ridiculous contention. ( It does not, 
of course, follow that a hundred rabbits are as smart as one 
human being. ) 

We are now in a position to compare the gradual increase 
through evolutionary time of both the amount of information 
contained in the genetic material and the amount of informa- 
tion contained in the brains of organisms. The two curves cross 
(p. 26) at a time corresponding to a few hundred million years 
ago and at an information content corresponding to a few 
billion bits. Somewhere in the steaming jungles of the Carbonif- 
erous Period there emerged an organism that for the first time in 
the history of the world had more information in its brains than 
in its genes. It was an early reptile which, were we to come 
upon it in these sophisticated times, we would probably not 
describe as exceptionally intelligent. But its brain was a symbolic 
turning point in the history of life. The two subsequent bursts of 
brain evolution, accompanying the emergence of mammals and 
the advent of manlike primates, were still more important ad- 
vances in the evolution of intelligence. Much of the history of 
life since the Carboniferous Period can be described as the 
gradual (and certainly incomplete) dominance of brains over 
genes. 















— 


in 

THE BRAIN 
AND THE CHARIOT 






When shall we three meet again . . . ? 

Wm. Shakespeare 
Macbeth 


T 


he brain of a fish isn’t much. A fish has a notochord 
or spinal cord, which it shares with even humbler 
invertebrates. A primitive fish also has a little swell- 
ing at the front end of the spinal cord, which is its 
brain. In higher fish the swelling is further developed but still 
weighs no more than a gram or two. That swelling corresponds 
in higher animals to the hindbrain or brainstem and the mid- 
brain. The brains of modern fish are chiefly midbrain, with a 
tiny forebrain; in modern amphibians and reptiles, it is the 
other way around (see figure on page 52). And yet fossil 
endocasts of the earliest known vertebrates show that the prin- 
cipal divisions of the modern brain (hindbrain, midbrain and 
forebrain, for example) were already established. Five hundred 
million years ago, swimming in the primeval seas, there were 
fishy creatures called ostracoderms and placoderms, whose 
brains had recognizably the same major divisions as ours. But 
the relative size and importance of these components, and even 
their early functions, were certainly very different from today. 
One of the most engaging views of the subsequent evolution 
of the brain is a story of the successive accretion and specializa- 
tion of three further layers surmounting the spinal cord, hind- 
brain and midbrain. After each evolutionary step, the older 
portions of the brain still exist and must still be accommodated. 
But a new layer with new functions has been added. 

The principal contemporary exponent of this view is Paul 
MacLean, chief of the Laboratory of Brain Evolution and Be- 
havior of the National Institute of Mental Health. One hallmark 
of MacLean’s work is that it encompasses many different ani- 




5* 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 



mals, ranging from lizards to squirrel monkeys. Another is that 
he and his colleagues have studied carefully the social and 
other behavior of these animals to improve their prospects of 
discovering what part of the brain controls what sort of 
behavior. 

Squirrel monkeys with “gothic” facial markings have a kind 
of ritual or display which they perform when greeting one 
another. The males bare their teeth, rattle the bars of their 
cage, utter a high-pitched squeak, which is possibly terrifying 
to squirrel monkeys, and lift their legs to exhibit an erect 
penis. While such behavior would border on impoliteness at 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


53 


many contemporary human social gatherings, it is a fairly 
elaborate act and serves to maintain dominance hierarchies in 
squirrel-monkey communities. 

MacLean has found that a lesion in one small part of a 
squirrel monkey’s brain will prevent this display while leaving 
a wide range of other behavior intact, including sexual and 
combative behavior. The part that is involved is in the oldest 
part of the forebrain, a part that humans as well as other pri- 
mates share with our mammalian and reptilian ancestors. In 
nonprimate mammals and in reptiles, comparable ritualized 
behavior seems to be controlled in the same part of the brain, 
and lesions in this reptilian component can impair other auto- 
matic types of behavior besides ritual— for example, walking 
or running. 

The connection between sexual display and position in a 
dominance hierarchy can be found frequently among the pri- 
mates. Among Japanese macaques, social class is maintained 
and reinforced by daily mounting: males of lower caste adopt 
the characteristic submissive sexual posture of the female in 
oestrus and are briefly and ceremonially mounted by higher- 
caste males. These mountings are both common and perfunc- 
tory. They seem to have little sexual content but rather serve 
as easily understood symbols of who is who in a complex 
society. 

In one study of the behavior of the squirrel monkey, Caspar, 
the dominant animal in the colony and by far the most active 
displayer, was never seen to copulate, although he accounted 
for two-thirds of the genital display in the colony — most of it 
directed toward other adult males. The fact that Caspar was 
highly motivated to establish dominance but insignificantly 
motivated toward sex suggests that while these two functions 
may involve identical organ systems, they are quite separate. The 
scientists studying this colony concluded: “Genital display is 
therefore considered the most effective social signal with re- 
spect to group hierarchy. It is ritualized and seems to acquire 
the meaning, 1 am the master.’ It is most probably derived 


54 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


from sexual activity, but it is used for social communication 
and separated from reproductive activity. In other words, 
genital display is a ritual derived from sexual behavior but 
serving social and not reproductive purposes.” 

In a television interview in 1976, a professional football player 
was asked by the talk-show host if it was embarrassing for 
football players to be together in the locker room with no 
clothes on. His immediate response: “We strut! No embarrass- 
ment at all. It’s as if we’re saying to each other, ‘Let’s see what 
you got, man!’ — except for a few, like the specialty team mem- 
bers and the water boy.” 

The behavioral as well as neuroanatomical connections be- 
tween sex, aggression and dominance are borne out in a variety 
of studies. The mating rituals of great cats and many other 
animals are barely distinguishable, in their early stages, from 
fighting. It is a commonplace that domestic cats sometimes 
purr loudly and perversely while their claws are slowly raking 
over upholstery or lightly clad human skin. The use of sex to 
establish and maintain dominance is sometimes evident in 
human heterosexual and homosexual practices (although it is 
not, of course, the only element in such practices), as well as 
in many “obscene” utterances. Consider the peculiar circum- 
stance that the most common two-word verbal aggression in 
English, and in many other languages, refers to an act of sur- 
passing physical pleasure; the English form probably comes 
from a Germanic and Middle Dutch verb fokken, meaning “to 
strike.” This otherwise puzzling usage can be understood as a 
verbal equivalent of macaque symbolic language, with the 
initial word “I” unstated but understood by both parties. It 
and many similar expressions seem to be human ceremonial 
mountings. As we will see, such behavior probably extends 
much farther back than the monkeys, back through hundreds 
of millions of years of geological time. 


From experiments such as those with squirrel monkeys, 
MacLean has developed a captivating model of brain struc- 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


55 


ture and evolution that he calls the triune brain. “We are 
obliged,” he says, “to look at ourselves and the world through 
the eyes of three quite different mentalities,” two of which 
lack the power of speech. The human brain, MacLean holds, 
amounts to three interconnected biological computers,” each 
with its own special intelligence, its own subjectivity, its own 
sense of time and space, its own memory, motor, and other 
functions.” Each brain corresponds to a separate major evolu- 
tionary step. The three brains are said to be distinguished 
neuroanatomically and functionally, and contain strikingly dif- 
ferent distributions of the neurochemicals dopamine and 
cholinesterase. 

At the most ancient part of the human brain lies the spinal 
cord; the medulla and pons, which comprise the hindbrain; and 
the midbrain. This combination of spinal cord, hindbrain and 
midbrain MacLean calls the neural chassis. It contains the 
basic neural machinery for reproduction and self-preservation, 
including regulation of the heart, blood circulation and respira- 
tion. In a fish or an amphibian it is almost all the brain there 
is. But a reptile or higher animal deprived of its forebrain is, 
according to MacLean, ‘as motionless and aimless as an idling 
vehicle without a driver.” 

Indeed, grand mal epilepsy can, I think, be described as a 
disease in which the cognitive drivers are all turned off because 
of a kind of electrical storm in the brain, and the victim is 
left momentarily with nothing operative but his neural chassis. 
This is a profound impairment, temporarily regressing the 
victim back several hundreds of millions of years. The ancient 
Greeks, whose name for the disease we still use, recognized its 
profound character and called it the disease inflicted by the 
gods. 

MacLean has distinguished three sorts of drivers of the 
neural chassis. The most ancient of them surrounds the mid- 
brain ( and is made up mostly of what neuroanatomists call the 
olfactostriatum, the corpus striatum, and the globus pallidus ) . 
We share it with the other mammals and the reptiles. It prob- 
ably evolved several hundred million years ago. MacLean calls 


56 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


it the reptilian or R-complex. Surrounding the R-complex is 
the limbic system, so called because it borders on the under- 
lying brain. ( Our arms and legs are called limbs because they 
are peripheral to the rest of the body. ) We share the limbic 
system with the other mammals but not, in its full elaboration, 
with the reptiles. It probably evolved more than one hundred 
and fifty million years ago. Finally, surmounting the rest of the 
brain, and clearly the most recent evolutionary accretion, is the 
neocortex. Like the higher mammals and the other primates, 
humans have a relatively massive neocortex. It becomes pro- 
gressively more developed in the more advanced mammals. 
The most elaborately developed neocortex is ours (and the 
dolphins’ and whales’). It probably evolved several tens of 


A highly schematic representation of the reptilian complex, limbic sys- 
tem, and neocortex in the human brain, after MacLean. 



THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 



Schematic views from the top and from the side of the rabbit, cat, and 
monkey brains. The dark stippled area is the limbic system, seen most 
easily in the side views. The white furrowed regions represent the neo- 
cortex, visible most readily in the top views. 

millions of years ago, but its development accelerated greatly 
a few million years ago when humans emerged. A schematic 
representation of this picture of the human brain is shown 
opposite, and a comparison of the limbic system with the neo- 
cortex in three contemporary mammals is shown above. The 
concept of the triune brain is in remarkable accord with 
the conclusions, drawn independently from studies of brain to 
body mass ratios in the previous chapter, that the emergence of 
mammals and of primates (especially humans) was accom- 
panied by major bursts in brain evolution. 

It is very difficult to evolve by altering the deep fabric of 
life; any change there is likely to be lethal. But fundamental 
change can be accomplished by the addition of new systems 
on top of old ones. This is reminiscent of a doctrine which was 
called recapitulation by Ernst Haeckel, a nineteenth-century 
German anatomist, and which has gone through various cycles 
of scholarly acceptance and rejection. Haeckel held that in its 


5 « 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


embryological development, an animal tends to repeat or re- 
capitulate the sequence that its ancestors followed during their 
evolution. And indeed in human intrauterine development we 
run through stages very much like fish, reptiles and nonprimate 
mammals before we become recognizably human. The fish 
stage even has gill slits, which are absolutely useless for the 
embryo who is nourished via the umbilical cord, but a necessity 
for human embryology: since gills were vital to our ancestors, 
we run through a gill stage in becoming human. The brain of 
a human fetus also develops from the inside out, and, roughly 
speaking, runs through the sequence : neural chassis, R-complex, 
limbic system and neocortex ( see the figure on the embryology 
of the human brain on page 198). 

The reason for recapitulation may be understood as follows: 
Natural selection operates only on individuals, not on species 
and not very much on eggs or fetuses. Thus the latest evolu- 
tionary change appears postpartum. The fetus may have char- 
acteristics, like the gill slits in mammals, that are entirely 
maladaptive after birth, but as long as they cause no serious 
problems for the fetus and are lost before birth, they can be re- 
tained. Our gill slits are vestiges not of ancient fish but of 
ancient fish embryos. Many new organ systems develop not 
by the addition and preservation but by the modification of 
older systems, as, for example, the modification of fins to legs, 
and legs to flippers or wings; or feet to hands to feet; or sebaceous 
glands to mammary glands; or gill arches to ear bones; or shark 
scales to shark teeth. Thus evolution by addition and the func- 
tional preservation of the preexisting structure must occur for 
one of two reasons — either the old function is required as well 
as the new one, or there is no way of bypassing the old system 
that is consistent with survival. 

There are many other examples in nature of this sort of evo- 
lutionary development. To take an almost random case, con- 
sider why plants are green. Green-plant photosynthesis utilizes 
light in the red and the violet parts of the solar spectrum to 
break down water, build up carbohydrates and do other planty 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


59 



A photograph taken with an electron microscope of a small plant called 
a red alga. Its scientific name is Porphyridium cruentum. The chloro- 
plast, this organism’s photosynthetic factory, almost fills the entire cell. 
The photograph is magnified 23,000 times and was taken by Dr. Eliza- 
beth Gantt of the Smithsonian Institution’s Radiation Biology Labora- 
tory. 


things. But the sun gives off more light in the yellow and the 
green part of the spectrum than in the red or violet. Plants with 
chlorophyll as their only photosynthetic pigment are rejecting 
light where it is most plentiful. Many plants seem belatedly to 
have noticed this and have made appropriate adaptations. 
Other pigments, which reflect red light and absorb yellow and 
green light, such as carotenoids and phycobilins, have evolved. 
Well and good. But have those plants with new photosynthetic 



6o 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


pigments abandoned chlorophyll? They have not. The figure 
on page 59 shows the photosynthetic factory of a red alga. 
The striations contain the chlorophyll, and the little spheres 
nestling against these striations contain the phycobilins, which 
make a red alga red. Conservatively, these plants pass along 
the energy they acquire from green and yellow sunlight to 
the chlorophyll pigment that, even though it has not absorbed 
the light, is still instrumental in bridging the gap between 
light and chemistry in all plant photosynthesis. Nature could 
not rip out the chlorophyll and replace it with better pigments; 
the chlorophyll is woven too deeply into the fabric of life. 
Plants with accessory pigments are surely different. They are 
more efficient. But there, still working, although with diminished 
responsibilities, at the core of the photosynthetic process is 
chlorophyll. The evolution of the brain has, I think, proceeded 
analogously. The deep and ancient parts are functioning still. 


1 THE R-COMPLEX 

If the preceding view is correct, we should expect the R- 
complex in the human brain to be in some sense performing 
dinosaur functions still; and the limbic cortex to be thinking 
the thoughts of pumas and ground sloths. Without a doubt, 
each new step in brain evolution is accompanied by changes 
in the physiology of the preexisting components of the brain. 
The evolution of the R-complex must have seen changes in 
the midbrain, and so on. What is more, we know that the 
control of many functions is shared in different components of 
the brain. But at the same time it would be astonishing if the 
brain components beneath the neocortex were not to a signifi- 
cant extent still performing as they did in our remote ancestors. 

MacLean has shown that the R-complex plays an important 
role in aggressive behavior, territoriality, ritual and the estab- 
lishment of social hierarchies. Despite occasional welcome ex- 
ceptions, this seems to me to characterize a great deal of modern 
human bureaucratic and political behavior. I do not mean that 
the neocortex is not functioning at all in an American political 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


6l 


convention or a meeting of the Supreme Soviet; after all, a 
great deal of the communication at such rituals is verbal and 
therefore neocortical. But it is striking how much of our actual 
behavior — as distinguished from what we say and think about 
it — can be described in reptilian terms. We speak commonly 
of a cold-blooded” killer. Machiavelli’s advice to his Prince 
was “knowingly to adopt the beast.” 

In an interesting partial anticipation of these ideas, the 
American philosopher Susanne Langer wrote: “Human life is 
shot through and through with ritual, as it is also with ani- 
malian practices. It is an intricate fabric of reason and rite, of 
knowledge and religion, prose and poetry, fact and dream. . . . 
Ritual, like art, is essentially the active termination of a sym- 
bolic transformation of experience. It is bom in the cortex, 
not in the ‘old brain’; but it is born of an elementary need of 
that organ, once the organ has grown to human estate.” Except 
for the fact that the R-complex is in the “old brain,” this seems 
to be right on target. 

I want to be very clear about the social implications of the 
contention that reptilian brains influence human actions. If 
bureaucratic behavior is controlled at its core by the R-complex, 
does this mean there is no hope for the human future? In 
human beings, the neocortex represents about 85 percent of 
the brain, which is surely some index of its importance com- 
pared to the brainstem, R-complex and limbic system. Neuro- 
anatomy, political history, and introspection all olfer evidence 
that human beings are quite capable of resisting the urge to 
surrender to every impulse of the reptilian brain. There is no 
way, for example, in which the Bill of Rights of the U.S. 
Constitution could have been recorded, much less conceived, 
by the R-complex. It is precisely our plasticity, our long child- 
hood, that prevents a slavish adherence to genetically pre- 
programmed behavior in human beings more than in any other 
species. But if the triune brain is an accurate model of how 
human beings function, it does no good whatever to ignore the 
reptilian component of human nature, particularly our ritual- 
istic and hierarchical behavior. On the contrary, the model may 


62 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


help us to understand what human beings are about. ( I wonder, 
for example, whether the ritual aspects of many psychotic ill- 
nesses — e.g., hebephrenic schizophrenia — could be the result 
of hyperactivity of some center in the R-complex, or of a failure 
of some neocortical site whose function is to repress or override 
the R-complex. I also wonder whether the frequent ritualistic 
behavior in young children is a consequence of the still- 
incomplete development of their neocortices. ) 

In a curiously apt passage, G. K. Chesterton wrote: “You can 
free things from alien or accidental laws, but not from the 
laws of their own nature. . . . Do not go about . . . encouraging 
triangles to break out of the prison of their three sides. If a 
triangle breaks out of its three sides, its life comes to a 
lamentable end.” Rut not all triangles are equilateral. Some 
substantial adjustment of the relative role of each component 
of the triune brain is well within our powers. 


2 THE LIMBIC SYSTEM 

The limbic system appears to generate strong or particularly 
vivid emotions. This immediately suggests an additional per- 
spective on the reptilian mind: it is not characterized by power- 
ful passions and wrenching contradictions but rather by a 
dutiful and stolid acquiescence to whatever behavior its genes 
and brains dictate. 

Electrical discharges in the limbic system sometimes result 
in symptoms similar to those of psychoses or those produced 
by psychedelic or hallucinogenic drugs. In fact, the sites of 
action of many psychotropic drugs are in the limbic system. 
Perhaps it controls exhilaration and awe and a variety of 
subtle emotions that we sometimes think of as uniquely human. 


Two photographs taken with an electron microscope within the third 
ventricle of the brain by Richard Steger of Wayne State University. Tiny 
waving hairs or cilia can be seen transporting small spherical brain 
proteins — like a crowd passing large beach balls overhead. 



6 4 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


The “master gland,” the pituitary, which influences other 
glands and dominates the human endocrine system, is an inti- 
mate part of the limbic region. The mood-altering qualities of 
endocrine imbalances give us an important hint about the 
connection of the limbic system with states of mind. There is 
a small almond-shaped inclusion in the limbic system called 
the amygdala which is deeply involved in both aggression and 
fear. Electrical stimulation of the amygdala in placid domestic 
animals can rouse them to almost unbelievable states of fear or 
frenzy. In one case, a house cat cowered in terror when pre- 
sented with a small white mouse. On the other hand, naturally 
ferocious animals, such as the lynx, become docile and tolerate 
being petted and handled when their amygdalas are extirpated. 
Malfunctions in the limbic system can produce rage, fear or 
sentimentality that have no apparent cause. Natural hyper- 
stimulation may produce the same results : those suffering from 
such a malady find their feelings inexplicable and inappro- 
priate; they may be considered mad. 

At least some of the emotion-determining role of such limbic 
endocrine systems as the pituitary, amygdala, and hypothalamus 
is provided by small hormonal proteins which they exude, and 
which affect other areas of the brain. Perhaps the best-known 
is the pituitary protein, ACTH ( adrenocorticotropic hormone ) , 
which can affect such diverse mental functions as visual reten- 
tion, anxiety and attention span. Some small hypothalamic 
proteins have been identified tentatively in the third ventricle 
of the brain, which connects the hypothalamus with the 
thalamus, a region also within the limbic system. The stunning 
pictures on page 63, taken with an electron microscope, show 
two close-ups of action in the third ventricle. The diagram on 
page 70 may help clarify some of the brain anatomy just 
described. 

There are reasons to think that the beginnings of altruistic 
behavior are in the limbic system. Indeed, with rare exceptions 
(chiefly the social insects), mammals and birds are the only 
organisms to devote substantial attention to the care of their 
young — an evolutionary development that, through the long 


%■** 



Courtesy of The American Museum of Natural History 


An impression of the possible form of the Mesozoic reptile Lycaenops 
by John Germann. Such mammal-like creatures were perhaps among the 
first to experience a substantial evolution of the limbic system. 


period of plasticity which it permits, takes advantage of the 
large information-processing capability of the mammalian and 
primate brains. Love seems to be an invention of the mammals.* 

Much in animal behavior substantiates the notion that strong 
emotions evolved chiefly in mammals and to a lesser extent in 
birds. The attachment of domestic animals to humans is, I think, 

“This rule on the relative parental concern of mammals and reptiles is, 
however, by no means without exceptions. Nile crocodile mothers care- 
fully put their fresh hatchlings in their mouths and carry them to the 
comparative safety of the river waters; while Serengeti male lions will, 
upon newly dominating a pride, destroy all the resident cubs. But on 
the whole, mammals show a strikingly greater degree of paiental care 
than do reptiles. The distinction may have been even more striking one 
hundred million years ago. 


66 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


beyond question. The apparently sorrowful behavior of many 
mammalian mothers when their young are removed is well- 
known. One wonders just how far such emotions go. Do horses 
on occasion have glimmerings of patriotic fervor? Do dogs feel 
for humans something akin to religious ecstasy? What other 
strong or subtle emotions are felt by animals that do not com- 
municate with us? 

The oldest part of the limbic system is the olfactory cortex, 
which is related to smell, the haunting emotional quality of which 
is familiar to most humans. A major component of our ability to 
remember and recall is localized in the hippocampus, a structure 
within the limbic system. The connection is clearly shown by the 
profound memory impairment that results from lesions of the 
hippocampus. In one famous case, H. M., a patient with a long 
history of seizures and convulsions, was subjected to a bilateral 
extirpation of the entire region about the hippocampus in a 
successful attempt to reduce their frequency and severity. He 
immediately became amnesic. He retained good perceptual 
skills, was able to learn new motor skills and experienced some 
perceptual learning but essentially forgot everything more than 
a few hours old. His own comment was “Every day is alone in 
itself — whatever enjoyment I’ve had and whatever sorrow I’ve 
had.” He described his life as a continuous extension of the 
feeling of disorientation many of us have upon awakening from 
a dream, when we have great difficulty remembering what has 
just happened. Remarkably enough, despite this severe im- 
pairment, his IQ improved after his hippocampectomy. He 
apparently could detect smells but had difficulty identifying 
by name the source of the smell. He also exhibited an apparent 
total disinterest in sexual activity. 

In another case, a young American airman was injured in a 
mock duel with another serviceman, when a miniature fencing 
foil was plunged into his right nostril, puncturing a small part 
of the limbic system immediately above. This resulted in a 
severe impairment of memory, similar to but not so severe as 
H. M.’s; a wide range of his perceptual and intellectual abilities 
was unaffected. His memory impairment was particularly 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


67 


noticeable with verbal material. In addition, the accident seems 
to have rendered him both impotent and unresponsive to pain. 
He once walked barefoot on the sun-heated metal deck of a 
cruise ship, without realizing that his feet were being badly 
burned until his fellow passengers complained of the uncom- 
fortable odor of charring flesh. On his own, he was aware of 
neither the pain nor the smell. 

From such cases, it seems apparent that so complex a mam- 
malian activity as sex is controlled simultaneously by all three 
components of the triune brain — the R-complex, the limbic sys- 
tem and the neocortex. (We have already mentioned the in- 
volvement of the R-complex and the limbic system in sexual 
activity. Evidence for involvement of the neocortex can be 
easily obtained by introspection. ) 

One segment of the old limbic system is devoted to oral and 
gustatory functions; another, to sexual functions. The connec- 
tion of sex with smell is very ancient, and is highly developed 
in insects — a circumstance that offers insights into both the 
importance and the disadvantages of reliance on smell in our 
remote ancestors. 

I once witnessed an experiment in which the head of a green 
bottle fly was connected by a very thin wire to an oscilloscope 
that displayed, in a kind of graph, any electrical impulses pro- 
duced by the fly’s olfactory system. (The fly’s head had only 
recently been severed from its body — in order to gain access 
to the olfactory apparatus — and was still in many respects 
functional . 0 ) The experimenters wafted a wide variety of odors 
in front of it, including obnoxious and irritating gases such as 
ammonia, with no discernible effects. The line traced out on 

"The heads and bodies of arthropods can briefly function without each 
other very nicely. A female praying mantis will often respond to earnest 
courting by decapitating her suitor. While this would be viewed as un- 
sociable among humans, it is not so among insects: extirpation of the 
brain removes sexual inhibitions and encourages what is left of the male 
to mate. Afterwards, the female completes her celebratory repast, dining, 
of course, alone. Perhaps this represents a cautionary lesson against ex- 
cessive sexual repression. 


68 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


the oscilloscope screen was absolutely flat and horizontal. Then 
a tiny quantity of the sex attractant released by the female of 
the species was waved before the severed head, and an enorm- 
ous vertical spike obligingly appeared on the oscilloscope 
screen. The bottle fly could smell almost nothing except the 
female sex attractant. But that molecule he could smell ex- 
ceedingly well. 

Such olfactory specialization is quite common in insects. The 
male silkworm moth is able to detect the female’s sex attract- 
tant molecule if only about forty molecules per second reach 
its feathery antennae. A single female silkworm moth need 
release only a hundredth of a microgram of sex attractant per 
second to attract every male silkworm in a volume of about a 
cubic mile. That is why there are silkworms. 

Perhaps the most curious exploitation of the reliance on 
smell to find a mate and continue the species is found in a 
South African beetle, which burrows into the ground during 
the winter. In the spring, as the ground thaws, the beetles 
emerge, but the male beetles groggily disinter themselves a 
few weeks before the females do. In this same region of South 
Africa, a species of orchid has evolved which gives off an 
aroma identical to the sex attractant of the female beetle. In 
fact, orchid and beetle evolution have produced essentially the 
same molecule. The male beetles turn out to be exceedingly 
nearsighted; and the orchids have evolved a configuration of 
their petals that, to a myopic beetle, resembles the female in a 
receptive sexual posture. The male beetles enjoy several weeks 
of orgiastic ecstasy among the orchids, and when eventually 
the females emerge from the ground, we can imagine a great 
deal of wounded pride and righteous indignation. Meanwhile 
the orchids have been successfully cross-pollinated by the 
amorous male beetles, who, now properly abashed, do their 
best to continue the beetle species; and both organisms sur- 
vive. (Incidentally, it is in the interest of the orchids not to be 
too consummately attractive; if the beetles fail to reproduce 
themselves, the orchids are in trouble.) We thus discover one 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


69 


limitation to purely olfactory sexual stimuli. Another is that 
since every female beetle produces the same sex attractant, it 
is not easy for a male beetle to fall in love with the lady insect 
of his heart’s desire. While male insects may display themselves 
to attract a female, or — as with stag beetles — engage in 
mandible-to-mandible combat with the female as the prize, the 
central role of the female sex attractant in mating seems to 
reduce the extent of sexual selection among the insects. 

Other methods of finding a mate have been developed in 
reptiles, birds and mammals. But the connection of sex with 
smell is still apparent neuroanatomically in higher animals as 
well as anecdotally in human experience. I sometimes wonder 
if deodorants, particularly “feminine” deodorants, are an at- 
tempt to disguise sexual stimuli and keep our minds on some- 
thing else. 


3 THE NEOCORTEX 

Even in fish, lesions of the forebrain destroy the traits of 
initiative and caution. In higher animals these traits, much 
elaborated, seem localized in the neocortex, the site of many 
of the characteristic human cognitive functions. It is frequently 
discussed in terms of four major regions or lobes: the frontal, 
parietal, temporal and occipital lobes. Early neurophysiologists 
held that the neocortex was primarily connected only to other 
places in the neocortex, but it is now known that there are 
many neural connections with the subcortical brain. It is, how- 
ever, by no means clear that the neocortical subdivisions are 
actually functional units. Each certainly has many quite differ- 
ent functions, and some functions may be shared among or 
between lobes. Among other functions, the frontal lobes seem 
to be connected with deliberation and the regulation of action; 
the parietal lobes, with spatial perception and the exchange of 
information between the brain and the rest of the body; the 
temporal lobes, with a variety of complex perceptual tasks; and 
the occipital lobes, with vision, the dominant sense in humans 
and other primates. 


70 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 



A schematic diagram of a side view of the human brain, dominated by 
the neocortex, with a smaller limbic system and brainstem or hind- 
brain. The R-complex is not shown. 


For many decades the prevailing view of neurophysiologists 
was that the frontal lobes, behind the forehead, are the sites 
of anticipation and planning for the future, both characteristic- 
ally human functions. But more recent work has shown that 
the situation is not so simple. A large number of cases of frontal 
lesions — largely suffered in warfare and as gunshot wounds — 
have been investigated by the American neurophysiologist Hans- 
Lukas Teuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
He found that many frontal-lobe lesions have almost no obvious 
effects on behavior; however, in severe pathology of the frontal 
lobes “the patient is not altogether devoid of capacity to antici- 
pate a course of events, but cannot picture himself in relation 
to those events as a potential agent.” Teuber emphasized the 
fact that the frontal lobe may be involved in motor as well as 
cognitive anticipation, particularly in estimating what the effect 
of voluntary movements will be. The frontal lobes also seem to 



THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


71 


be implicated in the connection between vision and erect bi- 
pedal posture. 

Thus the frontal lobes may . be involved with peculiarly 
human functions in two different ways. If they control antici- 
pation of the future, they must also be the sites of concern, the 
locales of worry. This is why transection of the frontal lobes 
reduces anxiety. But prefrontal lobotomy must also greatly 
reduce the patient’s capacity to be human. The price we pay 
for anticipation of the future is anxiety about it. Foretelling 
disaster is probably not much fun; Pollyanna was much happier 
than Cassandra. But the Cassandric components of our nature 
are necessary for survival. The doctrines for regulating the 
future that they produced are the origins of ethics, magic, 
science and legal codes. The benefit of foreseeing catastrophe 
is the ability to take steps to avoid it, sacrificing short-term for 
long-term benefits. A society that is, as a result of such fore- 
sight, materially secure generates the leisure time necessary 
for social and technological innovation. 

The other suspected function of the frontal lobes is to make 
possible mankind’s bipedal posture. Our upright stance may not 
have been possible before the development of the frontal lobes. 
As we shall see later in more detail, standing on our own two 
feet freed our hands for manipulation, which then led to a major 
accretion of human cultural and physiological traits. In a very 
real sense, civilization may be a product of the frontal lobes. 

Visual information from the eyes arrives in the human brain 
chiefly in the occipital lobe, in the back of the head; auditory 
impressions, in the upper part of the temporal lobe, beneath 
the temple. There is fragmentary evidence that these com- 
ponents of the neocortex are substantially less well developed 
in blind deaf-mutes. Lesions in the occipital lobe — as produced 
by gunshot wounds, for example — frequently induce an im- 
pairment in the field of vision. The victim may be in all other 
respects normal but able to see only with peripheral vision, 
perceiving a solid, dark blot looming in front of him at the 
center of the normal field of view. In other cases, more bizarre 


72 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


perceptions follow, including geometrically regular, cursive 
floating impairments in the visual field, and “visual fits” in 
which (for example) objects on the floor to the patient’s lower 
right are momentarily perceived as floating in the air to his 
upper left and rotated 180 degrees through space. It may even 
be possible to map which parts of the occipital lobes are re- 
sponsible for which visual functions by systematically calculat- 
ing the impairments of vision from various occipital lesions. 
Permanent impairments of vision are much less likely to occur 
in the very young, whose brains seem able to repair themselves 
or transfer functions to neighboring regions very well. 

The ability to connect auditory with visual stimuli is also 
localized in the temporal lobe. Lesions in the temporal lobe can 
result in a form of aphasia, the inability to recognize spoken 
words. It is remarkable and significant that brain-damaged 
patients can be completely competent in spoken language and 
entirely incompetent in written language, or vice versa. They 
may be able to write but unable to read; able to read numbers 
but not letters; able to name objects but not colors. There is 
in the neocortex a striking separation of function, which is con- 
trary to such common-sense notions as that reading and 
writing, or recognizing words and numbers, are very similar 
activities. There are also as yet unconfirmed reports of brain 
damage that results only in the inability to understand the 
passive voice or prepositional phrases or possessive construc- 
tions. (Perhaps the locale of the subjunctive mood will one 
day be found. Will Latins turn out to be extravagantly endowed 
and English-speaking peoples significantly short-changed in this 
minor piece of brain anatomy?) Various abstractions, includ- 
ing the parts of speech in grammar, seem, astonishingly, to 
be wired into specific regions of the brain. 

In one case, a temporal-lobe lesion resulted in a surprising 
impairment in the patient’s perception of faces, even the faces 
of his immediate family. Presented with the face on the oppo- 
site page, he described it as “possibly” being an apple. Asked to 
justify this interpretation, he identified the mouth as a cut in 
the apple, the nose as the stem of the apple folded back on its 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


73 



Face described by a patient as an apple. (Otherwise: apple described 
by a physician as a face.) After Teuber. 


surface, and the eyes as two worm holes. The same patient was 
perfectly able to recognize sketches of houses and other in- 
animate objects. A wide range of experiments shows that lesions 
in the right temporal lobe produce amnesia for certain types 
of nonverbal material, while lesions in the left temporal lobe 
produce a characteristic loss of memory for language. 

Our ability to read and make maps, to orient ourselves 
spatially in three dimensions and to use the appropriate sym- 
bols — all of which are probably involved in the development 
if not the use of language— are severely impaired by lesions in 
the parietal lobes, near the top of the head. One soldier who 
suffered a massive wartime penetration of the parietal lobe was 
for a full year unable to orient his feet into his slippers, much 
less find his bed in the hospital ward. He nevertheless eventu- 
ally experienced an almost complete recovery. 

A lesion of the angular gyrus of the neocortex, in the parietal 
lobe, results in alexia, the inability to recognize the printed 
word. The parietal lobe appears to be involved in all human 
symbolic language and, of all the brain lesions, a lesion in the 
parietal lobe causes the greatest decline in intelligence as meas- 
ured by activities in everyday life. 



74 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


Chief among the neocortical abstractions are the human 
symbolic languages, particularly reading and writing and 
mathematics. These seem to require cooperative activities of 
the temporal, parietal and frontal lobes, and perhaps the oc- 
cipital as well. Not all symbolic languages are neocortical how- 
ever; bees — without a hint of a neocortex — have an elaborate 
dance language, first elucidated by the Austrian entomologist 
Karl von Frisch, by which they communicate information on the 
distance and direction of available food. It is an exaggerated ges- 
tural language, imitative of the motions bees in fact perform 
when finding food — as if we were to make a few steps towards 
the refrigerator, point and rub our bellies, with our tongues 
lolling out all the while. But the vocabularies of such languages 
are extremely limited, perhaps only a few dozen words. The 
kind of learning that human youngsters experience during their 
long childhood seems almost exclusively a neocortical function. 

While most olfactory processing is in the limbic system, some 
occurs in the neocortex. The same division of function seems to 
apply to memory. A principal part of the limbic system, other 
than the olfactory cortex, is, as we have mentioned, the hippo- 
campal cortex. When the olfactory cortex is excised, animals 
can still smell, although with a much lower efficiency. This is 
another demonstration of the redundancy of brain function. 
There is some evidence that, in contemporary humans, the short- 
term memory of smell resides in the hippocampus. The original 
function of the hippocampus may have been exclusively the 
short-term memory of smell, useful in, for example, tracking 
prey or finding the opposite sex. But a bilateral hippocampal 
lesion in humans results, as in the case of H. M., in a profound 
impairment of all varieties of short-term memory. Patients with 
such lesions literally cannot remember from one moment to 
the next. Clearly, both hippocampus and frontal lobes are in- 
volved in human short-term memory. 

One of the many interesting implications of this is that 
short-term and long-term memory reside mostly in different 
parts of the brain. Classical conditioning — the ability of Pavlov’s 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


75 


dogs to salivate when the bells rang — seems to be located in 
the limbic system. This is long-term memory, but of a very 
restricted kind. The sophisticated sort of human long-term 
memory is situated in the neocortex, which is consistent with 
the human ability to think ahead. As we grow old, we some- 
times forget what has just been said to us while retaining vivid 
and accurate recollections of events in our childhood. In such 
cases, little seems to be wrong with either our short-term or our 
long-term memories; the problem is the connection between 
the two — we have great difficulty in accessing new material 
into the long-term memory. Penfield believed that this lost 
accessing ability arises from an inadequate blood supply to the 
hippocampus in old age — because of arteriosclerosis or other 
physical disabilities. Thus elderly people — and ones not so 
elderly — may have serious impairments in accessing short-term 
memory while being otherwise perfectly alert and intellectually 
keen.” This phenomenon also shows a clear-cut distinction 
between short-term and long-term memory, consistent with 
their localization in different parts of the brain. Waitresses ih 
short-order restaurants can remember an impressive amount 
of information, which they accurately transmit to the kitchen. 
But an hour later, the information has vanished utterly. It was 
put into the short-term memory only, and no effort was made 
to access it into the long-term memory. 

The mechanics of recall can be complex. A common experi- 
ence is that we know something is in our long-term memory — 

“Indeed, there is a range of medical evidence on the connection be- 
tween blood supply and intellectual abilities. It has long been known 
that patients deprived of oxygen for some minutes can experience per- 
manent and serious mental impairment. Operations to remove material 
from clogged carotid arteries in an effort to prevent stroke yield unex- 
pected benefits. According to one study, six weeks after such operations, 
the patients showed an average increase in IQ of eighteen points, a sub- 
stantial improvement. And there has been some speculation that immer- 
sion in hyperbaric oxygen — that is, oxygen under high pressure — can 
raise the intelligence of infants. 


76 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


a word, a name, a face, an experience — but find ourselves un- 
able to call it up. No matter how hard we try, the memory 
resists retrieval. But if we think sideways at it, recalling some 
slightly related or peripheral item, it often follows unbidden. 
(Human vision is also a little like this. When we look directly 
at a faint object — a star, say — we are using the fovea, the part 
of the retina with the greatest acuity and the greatest density 
of cells called cones. But when we avert our vision slightly — 
when, in a manner of speaking, we look sideways at the object 
— we bring into play the cells called rods, which are sensitive 
to feeble illumination and so able to perceive the faint star. ) It 
would be interesting to know why thinking sideways improves 
memory retrieval; it may be merely associating to the memory 
trace by a different neural pathway. But it does not suggest 
particularly efficient brain engineering. 

We have all had the experience of awakening with a particu- 
larly vivid, chilling, insightful or otherwise memorable dream 
clearly in mind; saying to ourselves, “I’ll certainly remember 
this dream in the morning”; and the next day having not the 
foggiest notion about the content of the dream or, at best, a 
vague trace of an emotion tone. On the other hand, if I am 
sufficiently exercised about the dream to awaken my wife in 
the middle of the night and tell her about it, I have no diffi- 
culty remembering its contents unaided in the morning. Like- 
wise, if I take the trouble of writing the dream down, when I 
awaken the next morning I can remember the dream perfectly 
well without referring to my notes. The same thing is true of, 
for example, remembering a telephone number. If I am told a 
number and merely think about it, I am likely to forget it or 
transpose some of the digits. If I repeat the numbers out loud 
or write them down, I can remember them quite well. This 
surely means that there is a part of our brain which remembers 
sounds and images, but not thoughts. I wonder if that sort of 
memory arose before we had very many thoughts — when it was 
important to remember the hiss of an attacking reptile or the 
shadow of a plummeting hawk, but not our own occasional 
philosophical reflections. 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


77 


ON HUMAN NATURE 

Despite the intriguing localization of function in the triune 
brain model, it is, I stress again, an oversimplification to insist 
upon perfect separation of function. Human ritual and emo- 
tional behavior are certainly influenced strongly by neocortical 
abstract reasoning; analytical demonstrations of the validity of 
purely religious beliefs have been proffered, and there are 
philosophical justifications for hierarchical behavior, such as 
Thomas Hobbes’ “demonstration” of the divine right of kings. 
Likewise, animals that are not human — and in fact even some 
animals that are not primates — seem to show glimmerings of 
analytical abilities. I certainly have such an impression about 
dolphins, as I described in my book The Cosmic Connection. 

Nevertheless, while bearing these caveats in mind, it seems 
a useful first approximation to consider the ritualistic and 
hierarchical aspects of our lives to be influenced strongly by the 
R-complex and shared with our reptilian forebears; the altru- 
istic, emotional and religious aspects of our lives to be localized 
to a significant extent in the limbic system and shared with our 
nonprimate mammalian forebears ( and perhaps the birds ) ; and 
reason to be a function of the neocortex, shared to some ex- 
tent with the higher primates and such cetaceans as dolphins 
and whales. While ritual, emotion and reasoning are all signifi- 
cant aspects of human nature, the most nearly unique human 
characteristic is the ability to associate abstractly and to reason. 
Curiosity and the urge to solve problems are the emotional 
hallmarks of our species; and the most characteristically human 
activities are mathematics, science, technology, music and the 
arts — a somewhat broader range of subjects than is usually 
included under the “humanities.” Indeed, in its common usage 
this very word seems to reflect a peculiar narrowness of vision 
about what is human. Mathematics is as much a “humanity” as 
poetry. Whales and elephants may be as “humane” as humans. 

The triune-brain model derives from studies of comparative 
neuroanatomy and behavior. But honest introspection is not 
unknown in the human species, and if the triune-brain model 


7 8 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 



Mosaic II by M. C. Escher. 


is correct, we would expect some hint of it in the history of 
human self-knowledge. The most widely known hypothesis 
that is at least reminiscent of the triune brain is Sigmund 
Freuds division of the human psyche into id, ego and super- 
ego. The aggressive and sexual aspects of the R-complex cor- 
respond satisfyingly to the Freudian description of the id 
(Latin for ‘it” — i.e., the beast-like aspect of our natures); but, 
so far as I know, Freud did not in his description of the id lay 
great stress on the ritual or social-hierarchy aspects of the 
R-complex. He did describe emotions as an ego function — in 
particular the oceanic experience,” which is the Freudian 
equivalent of the religious epiphany. However, the superego is 
not depicted primarily as the. site of abstract reasoning but 
rather as the internalizer of societal and parental strictures, 
which in the triune brain we might suspect to be more a func- 


THE BRAIN AND THE CHARIOT 


79 


tion of the R-complex. Thus I would have to describe the psy- 
choanalytic tripartite mind as only weakly in accord with the 
triune-brain model. 

Perhaps a better metaphor is Freud’s division of the mind 
into the conscious; the preconscious, which is latent but cap- 
able of being tapped; and the unconscious, which is repressed 
or otherwise unavailable. It was the tension that exists among 
the components of the psyche that Freud had in mind when 
he said of man that “his capacity for neurosis would merely 
be the obverse of his capacity for cultural development.” He 
called the unconscious functions “primary processes.” 

A superior agreement is found in the metaphor for the 
human psyche in the Platonic dialogue Phaedrus. Socrates 
likens the human soul to a chariot drawn by two horses — one 
black, one white — pulling in different directions and weakly 
controlled by a charioteer. The metaphor of the chariot itself 
is remarkably similar to MacLean’s neural chassis; the two 
horses, to the R-complex and the limbic cortex; and the chari- 
oteer barely in control of the careening chariot and horses, to 
the neocortex. In yet another metaphor, Freud described the 
ego as the rider of an unruly horse. Both the Freudian and the 
Platonic metaphors emphasize the considerable independence 
of and tension among the constituent parts of the psyche, a 
point that characterizes the human condition and to which we 
will return. Because of the neuroanatomical connections be- 
tween the three components, the triune brain must itself, like 
the Phaedrus chariot, be a metaphor; but it may prove to be a 
metaphor of great utility and depth. 


Then wilt thou not be loth 

To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess 

A Paradise within thee, happier far . . . 

They hand in hand with wandering steps and slow 
Through Eden took their solitary way. 

John Milton 
Paradise Lost 


Why didst thou leave the trodden paths of men 
Too soon, and with weak hands though mighty heart 
Dare the unpastured dragon in his den? 

Defenseless as thou wert, oh, where was then 
Wisdom, the mirrored shield . . . ? 


Percy Bysshe Shelley 
Adonais 



or their surface area, insects weigh very little. A 
beetle, falling from a high altitude, quickly achieves 
terminal velocity: air resistance prevents it from 
falling very fast, and, after alighting on the ground, 
it will walk away, apparently none the worse for the exper- 
ience. The same is true of small mammals — squirrels, say. A 
mouse can be dropped down a thousand-foot mine shaft and, 
if the ground is soft, will arrive dazed but essentially unhurt. 
In contrast, human beings are characteristically maimed or 
killed by any fall of more than a few dozen feet: because of 
our size, we weigh too much for our surface area. Therefore 
our arboreal ancestors had to pay attention. Any error in 
brachiating from branch to branch could be fatal. Every leap 
was an opportunity for evolution. Powerful selective forces 
were at work to evolve organisms with grace and agility, ac- 
curate binocular vision, versatile manipulative abilities, superb 
eye-hand coordination, and an intuitive grasp of Newtonian 
gravitation. But each of these skills required significant ad- 
vances in the evolution of the brains and particularly the neo- 
cortices of our ancestors. Human intelligence is fundamentally 
indebted to the millions of years our ancestors spent aloft in 
the trees. 

And after we returned to the savannahs and abandoned the 
trees, did we long for those great graceful leaps and ecstatic 
moments of weightlessness in the shafts of sunlight of the 
forest roof? Is the startle reflex of human infants today to 
prevent falling from the treetops? Are our nighttime dreams of 
flying and our daytime passion for flight, as exemplified in the 



8 4 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


lives of Leonardo da Vinci or Konstantin Tsiolkovskii, nostalgic 
reminiscences of those days gone by in the branches of the high 
forest?* 


Other mammals, even other nonprimate and noncetacean 
mammals, have neocortices. But in the evolutionary line lead- 
ing to man, when was the first large-scale development of the 
neocortex? While none of our simian ancestors are still around, 
this question can nevertheless be answered or at least ap- 
proached: we can examine fossil skulls. In humans, in apes and 
monkeys, and in other mammals, the brain volume almost fills 
the skull. This is not true, for example, in fish. Thus by taking 
a cast of a skull, we can determine what is called the endo- 
cranial volume of our immediate ancestors and collateral rela- 
tives and can make some rough estimates of their brain volumes. 

The question of who was and who was not an ancestor of 
man is still being hotly debated by the paleontologists, and 
hardly a year goes by without the discovery of some fossil of 
remarkably human aspect much older than anyone had pre- 
viously thought possible. What seems certain is that about five 
million years ago, there was an abundance of apelike animals, 
the gracile Australopithecines, who walked on two feet and 

* Modem rocket technology and space exploration owes an incalculable 
debt to Dr. Robert H. Goddard, who through many decades of devoted 
and lonely research was singlehandedly responsible for the development 
of essentially all important aspects of the modem rocket. Goddard’s 
interest in this subject originated in a magic moment. In the New England 
autumn of 1899, Goddard was a seventeen-year-old high school sopho- 
more who had climbed a cherry tree and, while idly looking down at 
the ground around him, experienced a kind of epiphanal vision of a 
vehicle that would transport human beings to the planet Mars. He re- 
solved to devote himself to the task. Exactly one year later, he climbed 
the tree again, and on every October 19th for the rest of his life, made a 
special point of recollecting that moment. Can it be an accident that this 
vision of voyages to the planets, which has led directly to its own his- 
torical fulfillment, was glimpsed in the limbs of a tree? 


EDEN AS A METAPHOR 


85 



From Mankind in the Making, by William Howells, drawings by Janis Cirulis (Doubleday). 


The hands of animals are adapted to their life styles, and vice versa. 
Shown are A the opossum; B the tree shrew; C the potto; D the 
tarsier; E the baboon (where this appendage is used partly as a hand 
and partly as a foot); F the orangutan, specialized for brachiation; and 
G humans, with a relatively long and opposable thumb. 


had brain volumes of about 500 cubic centimeters, some 100 cc 
more than the brain of a modem chimpanzee. With this evi- 
dence, paleontologists have deduced that “bipedalism preceded 
encephalization,” by which they mean that our ancestors 
walked on two legs before they evolved big brains. 

By three million years ago, there was a variety of bipedal 
fellows with a wide range of cranial volumes, some consider- 
ably larger than the East African gracile Australopithecines of 
a few million years earlier. One of them, which L. S. B. Leakey, 
the Anglo-Kenyan student of early man, called Homo habilis. 



EDEN AS A METAPHOR 


87 


had a brain volume of about 700 cubic centimeters. We also 
have archaeological evidence that Homo habilis made tools. 
The idea that tools are both the cause and the effect of walk- 
ing on two legs, which frees the hands, was first advanced by 
Charles Darwin. The fact that these significant changes in 
behavior are accompanied by equally significant changes in 
brain volume does not prove that the one is caused by the 
other; but our previous discussion makes such a causal link 
appear very likely. 

The table on page 88 summarizes the fossil evidence, 
through 1976, on our most recent ancestors and collateral 
relatives. The two rather different kinds of Australopithecines 
were not of the genus Homo, not human; they were still in- 
completely bipedal and had brain masses only about a third 
the size of the average adult human brain today. Were we to 
meet an Australopithecine, say, on the subway, we would 
perhaps be struck most by the almost total absence of forehead. 
He was the lowest of lowbrows. There are significant differ- 
ences between the two kinds of Australopithecines. The robust 
species was taller and heavier, with most impressive “nut- 
cracker” teeth and a remarkable evolutionary stability. The 
endocranial volume of A. robustus varies very little from speci- 
men to specimen over millions of years of time. The gracile 
Australopithecines, judging again from their teeth, probably ate 
meat as well as vegetables. They were smaller and lither, as 
their name indicates. However, they are considerably older and 
have much more variance in endocranial volume than their 
robust cousins. But, most important, the gracile Australopithe- 
cine sites are associated with a clear industry : the manufacture 
of tools made of stone and animal bones, horns and teeth — 
painstakingly carved, broken, rubbed and polished to make 
chipping, flaking, pounding and cutting tools. No tools have 
been associated with A. robustus. The ratio of brain weight to 
body weight is almost twice as large for the gracile as for the 


A family of gracile Australopithecines five million years ago. 

Copyright © 1965, 1973 Time, Inc. 


RECENT ANCESTORS AND COLLATERAL RELATIVES 



iiUion years; cc = cubic centimeters; m — meters ; kg — kilograms 


EDEN AS A METAPHOR 


89 


robust Australopithecus, and it is a natural speculation to won- 
der whether that factor of two is the difference between tools 
and no tools. 

At apparently the same epoch as the emergence of Australo- 
pithecus robustus, there arose a new animal, Homo habilis, the 
first true man. He was larger, both in body and in brain weight, 
than either of the Australopithecines, and had a ratio of brain 
to body weight about the same as that of the gracile Australo- 
pithecines. He emerged at a time when, for climatic reasons, 
the forests were receding. Homo habilis inhabited the vast 
African savannahs, an extremely challenging environment filled 
with an enormous variety of predators and prey. On these 
plains of low grass appeared both the first modern man and 
the first modem horse. They were almost exact contemporaries. 

In the last sixty million years, there has been a continuous 
evolution of ungulates, well recorded in the fossil record, and 
eventually culminating in the modern horse. Eohippus, the 
‘dawn horse” of some fifty million years ago, was about the 
size of an English collie, with a brain volume of about twenty- 
five cubic centimeters, and a ratio of brain to body weight 
about half that of comparable contemporary mammals. Since 
then, horses have experienced a dramatic evolution in both 
absolute and relative brain size, with major developments in 
the neocortex and particularly in the frontal lobes — an evolu- 
tion certainly accompanied by major improvements in equine 
intelligence. I wonder if the parallel developments in the intel- 
ligence of horse and man might have a common cause. Did 
horses, for example, have to be swift of foot, acute of sense, and 
intelligent to elude predators which hunted primate as well 
as equine prey? 

H. habilis had a high forehead, suggesting a significant de- 
velopment of the neocortical areas in the frontal and temporal 
lobes as well as the regions in the brain, to be discussed later, 
that seem to be connected with the power of speech. Were we 
to encounter Homo habilis — dressed, let us say, in the latest 
fashion on the boulevards of some modern metropolis — we 



The East African savannah near Olduvai Gorge a few million years ago. 
In right foreground are three hominids, perhaps Australopithecines, 
perhaps Homo habilis. The active volcano in the background is now 
Mt. Ngorongoro. 

would probably give him only a passing glance, and that because 
of his relatively small stature. Associated with Homo habilis 
are a variety of tools of considerable sophistication. In addi- 
tion, there is evidence from various circular arrangements of 
stones that Homo habilis may have constructed dwellings; that 
long before the Pleistocene Ice Ages, long before men regularly 
inhabited caves, H. habilis was constructing homes out-of-doors 
— probably of wood, wattle, grass and stone. 

Since H. habilis and A. robustus emerged at the same time, 
it is very unlikely that one was the ancestor of the other. The 
gracile Australopithecines were also contemporaries of Homo 
habilis but much more ancient. It is therefore possible — al- 
though by no means certain — that both H. habilis, with a 
promising evolutionary future, and A. robustus, an evolutionary 
dead end, arose from the gracile A. africanus, who survived 
long enough to be their contemporary. 

The first man whose endocranial volume overlaps that of 
modern humans is Homo erectus. For many years the principal 


EDEN AS A METAPHOR 


91 


specimens of H. erectus were known from China and thought 
to be about half a million years old. But in 1976 Richard Leakey 
of the National Museums of Kenya reported a nearly complete 
skull of Homo erectus found in geological strata one and a half 
million years old. Since the Chinese specimens of Homo 
erectus are clearly associated with the remains of campfires, it 
is possible that our ancestors domesticated fire much more than 
one half million years ago — which makes Prometheus far older 
than many had thought. 

Perhaps the most striking aspect of the archaeological record 
concerning tools is that as soon as they appear at all they 
appear in enormous abundance. It looks very much as though 
an inspired gracile Australopithecine discovered for the first 
time the use of tools and immediately taught the toolmaking 
skill to his relatives and friends. There is no way to explain 
the discontinuous appearance of stone tools unless the Australo- 
pithecines had educational institutions. There must have been 
some sort of stonecraft guild passing on from generation to 
generation the precious knowledge about the fabrication and 
use of tools — knowledge that would eventually propel such 
feeble and almost defenseless primates into domination of the 
planet Earth. Whether the genus Homo independently invented 
tools or borrowed the discovery from the genus Australo- 
pithecus is not known. 

We see from the table that the ratio of body to brain weight 
is, within the variance of measurement, roughly the same for 
the gracile Australopithecines, Homo habilis, Homo erectus 
and modern humans. The advances we have made in the last 
few million years cannot therefore be explained by the ratio 
of brain to body mass, but rather by increasing total brain 
mass, improved specialization of new function and complexity 
within the brain, and — especially — extrasomatic learning. 

L. S. B. Leakey emphasized that the fossil record of a few 
million years ago is replete with a great variety of manlike 
forms, an interesting number of which are found with holes or 
fractures in their skulls. Some of these injuries may have been 


9» 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


inflicted by leopards or hyenas; but Leakey and the South 
African anatomist Raymond Dart believed that many of them 
were inflicted by our ancestors. In Pliocene/Pleistocene times 
there was almost certainly a vigorous competition among many 
manlike forms, of which only one line survived — the tool ex- 
perts, the line that led to us. What role killing played in that 
competition remains an open question. The gracile Australo- 
pithecines were erect, agile, fleet and three and a half feet tall: 
“little people.” I sometimes wonder whether our myths about 
gnomes, trolls, giants and dwarfs could possibly be a genetic 
or cultural memory of those times. 


At the same time that the hominid cranial volume was under- 
going its spectacular increase, there was another striking change 
in human anatomy; as the British anatomist Sir Wilfred Le Gros 
Clark of Oxford University has observed, there was a whole- 
sale reshaping of the human pelvis. This was very likely an 
adaptation to permit the live birth of the latest model large- 
brained babies. Today, it is unlikely that any further sub- 
stantial enlargement of the pelvic girdle in the region of the 
birth canal is possible without severely impairing the ability 
of women to walk efficiently. (At birth, girls already have a 
significantly larger pelvis and skeletal pelvic opening than do 
boys; another large increment in the size of the female pelvis 
occurs at puberty. ) The parallel emergence of these two evolu- 
tionary events illustrates nicely how natural selection works. 
Those mothers with hereditary large pelvises were able to bear 
large-brained babies who because of their superior intelligence 
were able to compete successfully in adulthood with the 
smaller-brained offspring of mothers with smaller pelvises. He 
who had a stone axe was more likely to win a vigorous differ- 
ence of opinion in Pleistocene times. More important, he was 
a more successful hunter. But the invention and continued 
manufacture of stone axes required larger brain volumes. 

So far as I know, childbirth is generally painful in only one 
of the millions of species on Earth: human beings. This must 


EDEN AS A METAPHOR 


93 


be a consequence of the recent and continuing increase in 
cranial volume. Modern men and women have braincases twice 
the volume of Homo habilis’. Childbirth is painful because the 
evolution of the human skull has been spectacularly fast and 
recent. The American anatomist C. Judson Herrick described 
the development of the neocortex in the following terms: “Its 
explosive growth late in phylogeny is one of the most dramatic 
cases of evolutionary transformation known to comparative 
anatomy.” The incomplete closure of the skull at birth, the 
fontanelle, is very likely an imperfect accommodation to this 
recent brain evolution. 

The connection between the evolution of intelligence and 
the pain of childbirth seems unexpectedly to be made in the 
Book of Genesis. In punishment for eating the fruit of the tree 
of the knowledge of good and evil, God says to Eve,* “In pain 
shalt thou bring forth children” (Genesis 3:16). It is interesting 
that it is not the getting of any sort of knowledge that God has 
forbidden, but, specifically, the knowledge of the difference 
between good and evil — that is, abstract and moral judgments, 
which, if they reside anywhere, reside in the neocortex. Even 
at the time that the Eden story was written, the development 
of cognitive skills was seen as endowing man with godlike 
powers and awesome responsibilities. God says: “Behold, the 
man is become as one of us, to know good and evil; and now, 
lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the Tree of Life, 
and eat, and live forever” ( Genesis 3:22), he must be driven out 
of the Garden. God places cherubim with a flaming sword east 
of Eden to guard the Tree of Life from the ambitions of man.f 

Perhaps the Garden of Eden is not so different from Earth 
as it appeared to our ancestors of some three or four million 

“God’s judgment on the serpent is that henceforth “upon thy belly 
shalt thou go” — implying that previously reptiles traveled by an alterna- 
tive mode of locomotion. This is, of course, precisely true: snakes have 
evolved from four-legged reptilian ancestors resembling dragons. Many 
snakes still retain anatomical vestiges of the limbs of their ancestors. 

fCherubim is plural; Genesis 3:24 specifies one flaming sword. Pre- 
sumably flaming swords were in short supply. 


94 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


years ago, during a legendary golden age when the genus H omo 
was perfectly interwoven with the other beasts and vegetables. 
After the exile from Eden we find, in the biblical account, man- 
kind condemned to death; hard work; clothing and modesty as 
preventatives of sexual stimulation; the dominance of men over 
women; the domestication of plants (Cain); the domestication 
of animals (Abel); and murder (Cain plus Abel). These all 
correspond reasonably well to the historical and archaeological 
evidence. In the Eden metaphor, there is no evidence of mur- 
der before the Fall. But those fractured skulls of bipeds not 
on the evolutionary line to man may be evidence that our 
ancestors killed, even in Eden, many manlike animals. 

Civilization develops not from Abel, but from Cain the 
murderer. The very word “civilization” derives from the Latin 
word for city. It is the leisure time, community organization 
and specialization of labor in the first cities that permitted the 
emergence of the arts and technologies we think of as the 
hallmarks of civilizations. The first city, according to Genesis, 
was constructed by Cain, the inventor of agriculture — a tech- 
nology that requires a fixed abode. And it is his descendants, 
the sons of Lamech, who invent both “artifices in brass and 
iron” and musical instruments. Metallurgy and music — tech- 
nology and art — are in the line from Cain. And the passions 
that lead to murder do not abate: Lamech says, “For I have 
slain a man for wounding me, and a young man for bruising 
me; if Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy 
and sevenfold.” The connection between murder and invention 
has been with us ever since. Both derive from agriculture and 
civilization. 

One of the earliest consequences of the anticipatory skills 
that accompanied the evolution of the prefrontal lobes must 
have been the awareness of death. Man is probably the only 
organism on Earth with a relatively clear view of the inevita- 
bility of his own end. Burial ■ ceremonies that include the 
interment of food and artifacts along with the deceased go 
back at least to the times of our Neanderthal cousins, suggest- 


EDEN AS A METAPHOR 


95 



PHOTO ALINARI 


The creation of Adam: A relief on the doors of the Church of St. Peter 
in Bologna by Jacopo della Quercia. 

ing not only a widespread awareness of death but also an al- 
ready developed ritual ceremony to sustain the deceased in the 
afterlife. It is not that death was absent before the spectacular 
growth of the neocortex, before the exile from Eden; it is only 
that, until then, no one had ever noticed that death would be 
his destiny. 

The fall from Eden seems to be an appropriate metaphor 


96 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 



PHOTO ALIN AM 


The temptation of Eve and Adam by a reptile with a remarkably human 
head: A relief on the doors of St. Peter in Bologna by Jacopo della 
Quercia. 

for some of the major biological events in recent human evolu- 
tion. This may account for its popularity . 0 It is not so remark- 
able as to require us to believe in a kind of biological memory 
of ancient historical events, but it does seem to me close 
enough to risk at least raising the question. The only repository 
of such a biological memory is, of course, the genetic code. 

°In the West. There are, of course, many insightful and profound 
myths on the origin of mankind in other human cultures. 


EDEN AS A METAPHOR 


97 



PHOTO ALIN AHI 


The expulsion from Eden: A relief on the doors of St. Peter in Bologna 
by Jacopo della Quercia. 


By fifty-five million years ago, in the Eocene Period, there 
was a great proliferation of primates, both arboreal and 
ground-dwelling, and the evolution of a line of descent that 
eventually led to Man. Some primates of those times — e.g., a 
prosimian called Tetonius — exhibit in their endocranial casts 
tiny nubs where the frontal lobes will later evolve. The first 
fossil evidence of a brain of even vaguely human aspect dates 
back to eighteen million years to the Miocene Period, when 


9« 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


an anthropoid ape which we call Proconsul or Dryopithecus 
appeared. Proconsul was quadrupedal and arboreal, probably 
ancestral to the present great apes and possibly to Homo 
sapiens as well. He is roughly what we might expect for a 
common ancestor of apes and men. (His approximate con- 
temporary, Ramapithecus, is thought by some anthropologists 
to be ancestral to man.) Proconsul’s endocranial casts show 
recognizable frontal lobes but much less well developed neo- 
cortical convolutions than are displayed by apes and men 
today. His cranial volume was still very small. The biggest burst 
of evolution in cranial volume occurred in the last few million 
years. 

Patients who have had prefrontal lobotomies have been de- 
scribed as losing a “continuing sense of self” — the feeling that 
I am a particular individual with some control over my life 
and circumstances, the “me-ness” of me, the uniqueness of the 
individual. It is possible that lower mammals and reptiles, 
lacking extensive frontal lobes, also lack this sense, real or 
illusory, of individuality and free will, which is so character- 
istically human and which may first have been experienced 
dimly by Proconsul. 

The development of human culture and the evolution of 
those physiological traits we consider characteristically human 
most likely proceeded — almost literally — hand in hand: the 
better our genetic predispositions for running, communicating 
and manipulating, the more likely we were to develop effective 
tools and hunting strategies; the more adaptive our tools and 
hunting strategies, the more likely it was that our character- 
istic genetic endowments would survive. The American anthro- 
pologist Sherwood Washburn of the University of California, a 
principal exponent of this view, has said: “Much of what we 
think of as human evolved long after the use of tools. It is 
probably more correct to think of much of our structure as the 
result of culture than it is to think of men anatomically like 
ourselves slowly developing culture.” 

Some students of human evolution believe that part of the 


EDEN AS A METAPHOR 


99 


selection pressure behind this enormous burst in brain evolu- 
tion was in the motor cortex and not at first in the neocortical 
regions responsible for cognitive processes. They stress the re- 
markable abilities of human beings to throw projectiles ac- 
curately, to move gracefully, and — as Louis Leakey enjoyed 
illustrating by direct demonstration — naked, to outrun and 
immobilize game animals. Such sports as baseball, football, 
wrestling, track and field events, chess and warfare may owe 
their appeal — as well as their largely male following — to these 
prewired hunting skills, which served us so well for millions of 
years of human history but which find diminished practical 
applications today. 

Effective defense against predators and the hunting of 
game were both necessarily cooperative ventures. The en- 
vironment in which man evolved — in Africa in Plicene and 
Pleistocene times — was inhabited by a variety of terrifying 
mammalian carnivores, perhaps the most awesome of which 
were packs of large hyenas. It was very difficult to defend one- 
self alone against such a pack. Stalking large animals, either 
solitary beasts or herds, is dangerous; some gestural com- 
munication among the hunters is necessary. We know, for 
example, that shortly after man entered North America, via the 
Bering Straits in the Pleistocene Period, there were massive 
and spectacular kills of large game animals, often by driving 
them over cliffs. In order to stalk a single wildebeest or 
stampede a herd of antelope to their deaths, hunters must 
share at least a minimal symbolic language. Adam’s first act 
was linguistic — long before the Fall and even before the crea- 
tion of Eve: he named the animals of Eden. 

Some forms of gestural symbolic language, of course, orig- 
inated much earlier than the primates; canines and many other 
mammals who form dominance hierarchies may indicate sub- 
mission by averting the eyes or baring the neck. We have men- 
tioned other submissive rituals in primates such as macaques. 
The human greetings of bow, nod and curtsy may have a 
similar origin. Many animals seem to signal friendship by bit- 


lOO 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


ing, but not hard enough to hurt, as if to say, “I am able to bite 
you but choose not to do so.” The raising of the right hand as a 
symbol of greeting among humans has precisely the same 
significance: “I could attack you with a weapon but choose not 
to wield one.”* 

Extensive gestural languages were employed by many 
human hunting communities — for example, among the Plains 
Indians, who also used smoke signals. According to Homer, 
the victory of the Hellenes at Troy was conveyed from Ilium to 
Greece, a distance of some hundreds of miles, by a series of 
signal fires. The date was about 1100 b . c . However, both the 
repertoire of ideas and the speed with which ideas can be 
communicated in gestural or sign languages is limited. Darwin 
pointed out that gestural languages cannot usefully be em- 
ployed while our hands are otherwise occupied, or at night, or 
when our view of the hands is obstructed. One can imagine 
gestural languages being gradually supplemented and then 
supplanted by verbal languages — which originally may have 
been onomatopoeic ( that is, imitative in sound of the object or 
action being described). Children call dogs “bow-wows.” In 
almost all human languages the child’s word for “mother” 
seems imitative of the sound made inadvertently while feeding 
at the breast. But all of this could not have occurred without a 
restructuring of the brain. 

We know from skeletal remains associated with early man 
that our ancestors were hunters. We know enough about the 

‘The upraised and open right hand is sometimes described as a “uni- 
versal” symbol of good will. It at least runs the gamut from Praetorian 
Guards to Sioux scouts. Since those wielding weapons are, in human 
history, characteristically male, it should be and is a characteristically 
male greeting. For these reasons, among others, the plaque aboard the 
Pioneer 10 spacecraft — the first artifact of mankind to leave the solar 
system — included a drawing of a naked man and woman, the man’s 
hand raised, palm out, in greeting (see illustration on p. 235). In The 
Cosmic Connection I describe the humans on the plaque as the most 
obscure part of the message. Nevertheless, I wonder. Could the signifi- 
cance of the man’s gesture be deduced by beings with very different 
biologies? 


Photo by Nat Farbman, Life. Courtesy of Time-Life Picture Agency, (c) lime Inc. 


The development of human language was a crucial turning point in the 
evolution of man. Among its highest peaks, as here, were story-telling 
cultures before the invention of writing. 


hunting of large animals to realize that some language is re- 
quired for cooperative stalking. But ideas on the antiquity of 
language have received a measure of unexpected support from 
detailed studies of fossil endocasts made by the American anthro- 
pologist Ralph L. Holloway of Columbia University. Hollo- 
way’s casts of fossil skulls are made of rubber latex, and he has 
attempted to deduce something of the detailed morphology of 
the brain from the shape of the skull. The activity is a kind of 
phrenology, but on the inside rather than on the outside and 
much more soundly based. Hollowly believes that a region of 
the brain known as Broca’s area, one of several centers required 
for speech, can be detected in fossil endocasts; and that he has 


102 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


found evidence for Broca’s area in a Homo habilis fossil more 
than two million years old. The development of language, tools 
and culture may have occurred roughly simultaneously. 


There were, incidentally, manlike creatures who lived only a 
few tens of thousands of years ago — the Neanderthals and the 
Cro-Magnons — who had average brain volumes of about 1,500 
cubic centimeters; that is, more than a hundred cubic centi- 
meters larger than ours. Most anthropologists guess that we are 
not descended from Neanderthals and may not be from Cro- 
Magnons either. But their existence raises the question: Who 
were those fellows? What were their accomplishments? Cro- 
Magnon was also very large: some specimens were well over 
six feet tall. We have seen that a difference in brain volume 
of 100 cubic centimeters does not seem to be significant, and 
perhaps they were no smarter than we or our immediate 
ancestors; or perhaps they had other, still unknown, physical 
impediments. Neanderthal was a lowbrow, but his head was 
long, front to back; in contrast, our heads are not so deep, but 
they are taller: we can certainly be described as highbrows. 
Might the brain growth exhibited by Neanderthal man have 
been in the parietal and occipital lobes, and the major brain 
growth of our ancestors in the frontal and temporal lobes? Is 
it possible that the Neanderthals developed quite a different 
mentality than ours, and that our superior linguistic and antic- 
ipatory skills enabled us to destroy utterly our husky and intel- 
ligent cousins? 

So far as we know, nothing like human intelligence ap- 
peared on Earth before a few million, or at least a few tens of 
millions of years ago. But that is a few tenths of a percent of 
the age of Earth, very late in December in the Cosmic 
Calendar. Why did it appear so late? The answer clearly seems 
to be that some particular property of higher primate and 
cetacean brains did not evolve until recently. But what is that 
property? I can suggest at least four possibilities, all of which 



Photograph by Chris Barker. Copyright © Marshall Cavendish Ltd. 


A Pleistocene summit. Left to right: Homo habilis (in an inadequate 
state of repair), Homo erectus, Neanderthal man, Cro-Magnon man, and 
Homo sapiens. 


have already been mentioned, either explicitly or implicitly: 

( 1) Never before was there a brain so massive; (2) Never be- 
fore was there a brain with so large a ratio of brain to body 
mass; (3) Never before was there a brain with certain func- 
tional units (large frontal and temporal lobes, for example); 
(4) Never before was there a brain with so many neural con- 
nections or synapses. (There seems to be some evidence that 
along with the evolution of the human brain there may have 
been an increase in the number of connections of each neuron 
with its neighbor, and in the number of microcircuits.) Ex- 
planations 1, 2 and 4 argue that a quantitative change produced 
a qualitative change. It does not seem to me that a crisp choice 
among these four alternatives can be made at the present time, 
and I suspect that the truth will actually embrace most or all 
of these possibilities. 

The British student of human evolution Sir Arthur Keith 
proposed what he called a “Rubicon” in the evolution of the 
human brain. He thought that at the brain volume of Homo 
erectus — about 750 cubic centimeters, roughly the engine 
displacement of a fast motorcycle — the uniquely human quali- 
ties begin to emerge. The “Rubicon” might, of course, have been 



104 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


more qualitative than quantitative. Perhaps the difference was 
not so much an additional 200 cubic centimeters as some 
specific developments in the frontal, temporal and parietal 
lobes which provided us with analytical ability, foresight and 
anxiety. 

While we can debate what the “Rubicon” corresponds to, 
the idea of some sort of Rubicon is not without value. But if 
there is a Rubicon anywhere near 750 cubic centimeters, while 
differences of the order of 100 or 200 cubic centimeters do not 
— at any rate to us— seem to be compelling determinants of 
intelligence, might not the apes be intelligent in some rec- 
ognizably human sense? A typical chimpanzee brain volume is 
400 cubic centimeters; a lowland gorilla’s, 500 cc. This is the 
range of brain volumes among the tool-using gracile Australopi- 
thecines. 

The Jewish historian Josephus added to the list of penalties 
and tribulations that accompanied Mankind’s exile from Eden 
the loss of our ability to communicate with the animals. 
Chimpanzees have large brains; they have well-developed 
neocortices; they, too, have long childhoods and extended 
periods of plasticity. Are they capable of abstract thought? If 
they’re smart, why don’t they talk? 


V 

THE ABSTRACTIONS 
OF BEASTS 







I demand of you, and of the whole world, that you 
show me a generic character ... by which to dis- 
tinguish between Man and Ape. I myself most as- 
suredly know of none. I wish somebody would 
indicate one to me. But, if I had called man an ape, 
or vice versa, I would have fallen under the ban of 
all the ecclesiastics. It may be that as a naturalist I 
ought to have done so. 

Carl Linnaeus, 
the founder of taxonomy, 1788 


easts abstract not,” announced John Locke, ex- 
pressing mankind’s prevailing opinion throughout 
recorded history. Bishop Berkeley had, however, a 
sardonic rejoinder: “If the fact that brutes abstract 
not be made the distinguishing property of that sort of animal, 
I fear a great many of those that pass for men must be reckoned 
into their number.” Abstract thought, at least in its more subtle 
varieties, is not an invariable accompaniment of everyday life 
for the average man. Could abstract thought be a matter not 
of kind but of degree? Could other animals be capable of 
abstract thought but more rarely or less deeply than humans? 

We have the impression that other animals are not very 
intelligent. But have we examined the possibility of animal 
intelligence carefully enough, or, as in Francois Truffaut’s 
poignant film The Wild Child, do we simply equate the absence 
of our style of expression of intelligence with the absence of 
intelligence? In discussing communication with the animals, 
the French philosopher Montaigne remarked, “The defect that 
hinders communication betwixt them and us, why may it not 
be on our part as well as theirs?”"* 



°Our difficulties in understanding or effectuating communication with 
other animals may arise from our reluctance to grasp unfamiliar ways of 
dealing with the world. For example, dolphins and whales, who sense 
their surrounding with a quite elaborate sonar echo location technique, 
also communicate with each other by a rich and elaborate set of clicks, 
whose interpretation has so far eluded human attempts to understand it. 
One very clever recent suggestion, which is now being investigated, is 
that dolphin/dolphin communication involves a re-creation of the sonar 




THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


108 


There is, of course, a considerable body of anecdotal informa- 
tion suggesting chimpanzee intelligence. The first serious study 
of the behavior of simians — including their behavior in the 
wild — was made in Indonesia by Alfred Russel Wallace, the 
co-discoverer of evolution by natural selection. Wallace con- 
cluded that a baby orangutan he studied behaved “exactly like 
a human child in similar circumstances.” In fact, “orangutan” 
is a Malay phrase meaning not ape but “man of the woods.” 
Teuber recounted many stories told by his parents, pioneer Ger- 
man ethologists who founded and operated the first research 
station devoted to chimpanzee behavior on Tenerife in the 
Canary Islands early in the second decade of this century. It 
was here that Wolfgang Kohler performed his famous studies 
of Sultan, a chimpanzee “genius” who was able to connect two 
rods in order to reach an otherwise inaccessible banana. On 
Tenerife, also, two chimpanzees were observed maltreating a 
chicken : One would extend some food to the fowl, encouraging 
it to approach; whereupon the other would thrust at it with a 
piece of wire it had concealed behind its back. The chicken 
would retreat but soon allow itself to approach once again — 
and be beaten once again. Here is a fine combination of behavior 
sometimes thought to be uniquely human: cooperation, planning 
a future course of action, deception and cruelty. It also reveals 
that chickens have a very low capacity for avoidance learning. 

Until a few years ago, the most extensive attempt to com- 

reflection characteristics of the objects being described. In this view a 
dolphin does not “say” a single word for shark, but rather transmits a set 
of clicks corresponding to the audio reflection spectrum it would obtain 
on irradiating a shark with sound waves in the dolphin’s sonar mode. The 
basic form of dolphin/dolpbin communication in this view would be a 
sort of aural onomatopoeia, a drawing of audio frequency pictures — -in 
this case, caricatures of a shark. We could well imagine the extension of 
such a language from concrete to abstract ideas, and by the use of a 
kind of audio rebus — both analogous to the development in Mesopotamia 
and Egypt of human written languages. It would also be possible, then, 
for dolphins to create extraordinary audio images out of their imaginations 
rather than their experience. 


THE ABSTRACTIONS OF BEASTS 


109 


municate with chimpanzees went something like this: A new- 
born chimp was taken into a household with a newborn baby, 
and both would be raised together — twin cribs, twin bassinets, 
twin high chairs, twin potties, twin diaper pails, twin baby- 
powder cans. At the end of three years, the young chimp had, 
of course, far outstripped the young human in manual dexterity, 
running, leaping, climbing and other motor skills. But while 
the child was happily babbling away, the chimp could say only, 
and with enormous difficulty, “Mama,” “Papa,” and “cup.” 
From this it was widely concluded that in language, reasoning 
and other higher mental functions, chimpanzees were only 
minimally competent: “Beasts abstract not.” 

But in thinking over these experiments, two psychologists, 
Beatrice and Robert Gardner, at the University of Nevada 
realized that the pharynx and larynx of the chimp are not suited 
for human speech. Human beings exhibit a curious multiple 
use of the mouth for eating, breathing and communicating. In 
insects such as crickets, which call to one another by rubbing 
their legs, these three functions are performed by com- 
pletely separate organ systems. Human spoken language seems 
to be adventitious. The exploitation of organ systems with other 
functions for communication in humans is also indicative of 
the comparatively recent evolution of our linguistic abilities. 
It might be, the Gardners reasoned, that chimpanzees have 
substantial language abilities which could not be expressed 
because of the limitations of their anatomy. Was there any 
symbolic language, they asked, that could employ the strengths 
rather than the weaknesses of chimpanzee anatomy? 

The Gardners hit upon a brilliant idea: Teach a chimpanzee 
American sign language, known by its acronym Ameslan, and 
sometimes as “American deaf and dumb language” ( the “dumb” 
refers, of course, to the inability to speak and not to any failure 
of intelligence). It is ideally suited to the immense manual 
dexterity of the chimpanzee. It also may have all the crucial 
design features of verbal languages. 

There is by now a vast library of described and filmed con- 


no THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


versations, employing Ameslan and other gestural languages, 
with Washoe, Lucy, Lana and other chimpanzees studied by 
the Gardners and others. Not only are there chimpanzees with 
working vocabularies of 100 to 200 words; they are also able to 
distinguish among nontrivially different grammatical patterns 
and syntaxes. What is more, they have been remarkably inven- 
tive in the construction of new words and phrases. 

On seeing for the first time a duck land quacking in a pond, 
Washoe gestured “water bird,” which is the same phrase used 
in English and other languages, but which Washoe invented 
for the occasion. Having never seen a spherical fruit other than 
an apple, but knowing the signs for the principal colors, Lana, 
upon spying a technician eating an orange, signed “orange 
apple. After tasting a watermelon, Lucy described it as “candy 
drink or “drink fruit,” which is essentially the same word form 
as the English “water melon.” But after she had burned her 
mouth on her first radish, Lucy forever after described them as 
cry hurt food.” A small doll placed unexpectedly in Washoe’s 


Washoe (left) signaling in Ameslan “hat,” for a woolen cap. 



THE ABSTRACTIONS OF BEASTS 111 


cup elicited the response “Baby in my drink.” When Washoe 
soiled, particularly clothing or furniture, she was taught the 
sign “dirty,” which she then extrapolated as a general term of 
abuse. A rhesus monkey that evoked her displeasure was re- 
peatedly signed at: “Dirty monkey, dirty monkey, dirty 
monkey.” Occasionally Washoe would say things like “Dirty 
Jack, gimme drink.” Lana, in a moment of creative annoyance, 
called her trainer “You green shit.” Chimpanzees have invented 
swear words. Washoe also seems to have a sort of sense of 
humor; once, when riding on her trainer’s shoulders and, per- 
haps inadvertently, wetting him, she signed: “Funny, funny.” 

Lucy was eventually able to distinguish clearly the meanings 
of the phrases “Roger tickle Lucy” and “Lucy tickle Roger,” 
both of which activities she enjoyed with gusto. Likewise, Lana 
extrapolated from “Tim groom Lana” to “Lana groom Tim.” 
Washoe was observed “reading” a magazine — i.e., slowly turn- 
ing the pages, peering intently at the pictures and making, to no 
one in particular, an appropriate sign, such as “cat” when view- 


Washoe (left) signaling in Ameslan “sweet,” for a lollipop. 



112 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


ing a photograph of a tiger, and “drink” when examining a 
Vermouth advertisement. Having learned the sign “open” with 
a door, Washoe extended the concept to a briefcase. She also 
attempted to converse in Ameslan with the laboratory cat, who 
turned out to be the only illiterate in the facility. Having ac- 
quired this marvelous method of communication, Washoe mav 
have been surprised that the cat was not also competent in 
Ameslan. And when one day Jane, Lucy’s foster mother, left 
the laboratory, Lucy gazed after her and signed: “Cry me. Me 
cry. 

Boyce Rensberger is a sensitive and gifted reporter for the 
New York Times whose parents could neither speak nor hear, 
although he is in both respects normal. His first language, how- 
ever, was Ameslan. He had been abroad on a European assign- 
ment for the Times for some years. On his return to the United 
States, one of his first domestic duties was to look into the 
Gardners’ experiments with Washoe. After some little time with 
the chimpanzee, Rensberger reported, “Suddenly I realized I 
was conversing with a member of another species in my native 
tongue.” The use of the word tongue is, of course, figurative: it 
is built deeply into the structure of the language (a word that 
also means tongue ) . In fact, Rensberger was conversing with 
a member of another species in his native “hand.” And it is just 
this transition from tongue to hand that has permitted humans 
to regain the ability — lost, according to Josephus, since Eden — - 
to communicate with the animals. 

In addition to Ameslan, chimpanzees and other nonhuman 
primates are being taught a variety of other gestural languages. 
At the Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center in Atlanta, 
Georgia, they are learning a specific computer language called 
(by the humans, not the chimps) “Yerkish.” The computer 
records all of its subjects’ conversations, even during the night 
when no humans are in attendance; and from its ministrations 
we have learned that chimpanzees prefer jazz to rock and 
movies about chimpanzees to movies about human beings. 


THE ABSTRACTIONS OF BEASTS 


H3 


Lana had, by January 1976, viewed The Developmental 
Anatomy of the Chimpanzee 245 times. She would undoubtedly 
appreciate a larger film library. . 

In the illustration on page 114, Lana is shown requesting, in 
proper Yerkish, a piece of banana from the computer. The 
syntax required to request from the computer water, juice, 
chocolate candy, music, movies, an open window and com- 
panionship are also displayed. ( The machine provides for many 
of Lana’s needs, but not all. Sometimes, in the middle of the 
night, she forlornly types out: “Please, machine, tickle Lana.”) 
More elaborate requests and commentaries, each requiring a 
creative use of a set grammatical form, have been developed 
subsequently. 

Lana monitors her sentences on a computer display, and 
erases those with grammatical errors. Once, in the midst of 
Lana’s construction of an elaborate sentence, her trainer mis- 
chievously and repeatedly interposed, from his separate com- 
puter console, a word that made nonsense of Lana’s sentence. 
She gazed at her computer display, spied her trainer at his 
console, and composed a new sentence: “Please, Tim, leave 
room.” Just as Washoe and Lucy can be said to speak, Lana can 
be said to write. 

At an early stage in the development of Washoe’s verbal 
abilities, Jacob Bronowski and a colleague wrote a scientific 
paper denying the significance of Washoe’s use of gestural lan- 
guage because, in the limited data available to Bronowski, 
Washoe neither inquired nor negated. But later observations 
showed that Washoe and other chimpanzees were perfectly 
able both to ask questions and to deny assertions put to them. 
And it is difficult to see any significant difference in quality 
between chimpanzee use of gestural language and the use of 
ordinary speech by children in a manner that we unhesitatingly 
attribute to intelligence. In reading Bronowski’s paper I cannot 
help but feel that a little pinch of human chauvinism has crept 
in, an echo of Locke’s “Beasts abstract not.” In 1949, the Amer- 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


T 14 



Lana at her computer. The overhead bar, just off the top, must be 
pulled to activate the console. Dispensers for juice, water, bananas, 
and chocolate candies are near the base of the console. 

ican anthropologist Leslie White stated unequivocally: “Human 
behavior is symbolic behavior; symbolic behavior is human be- 
havior.” What would White have made of Washoe, Lucy and 
Lana? 


These findings on chimpanzee language and intelligence have 
an intriguing bearing on “Rubicon” arguments — the contention 
that the total brain mass, or at least the ratio of brain to body 
mass, is a useful index of intelligence. Against this point of view 
it was once argued that the lower range of the brain masses of 
microcephalic humans overlaps the upper range of brain masses 



THE ABSTRACTIONS OF BEASTS 


115 



The diagram shows the logic tree required for a number of requests to 
be communicated. The system is both polite and grammatical: requests 
must be initiated by a “please” and terminated by a period. 


of adult chimpanzees and gorillas; and yet, it was said, micro- 
cephalies have some, although severely impaired, use of lan- 
guage — while the apes have none. But in only relatively few 
cases are microcephalies capable of human speech. One of the 
best behavioral descriptions of microcephalies was written by a 
Russian physician, S. Korsakov, who in 1893 observed a female 
microcephalic named “Masha/ She could understand a very 
few questions and commands and cotdd occasionally reminisce 
on her childhood. She sometimes chattered away, but there was 
little coherence to what she uttered. Korsakov characterized her 
speech as having “an extreme poverty of logical associations.” 
As an example of her poorly adapted and automaton-like intel- 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


ll6 


ligence, Korsakov described her eating habits. When food was 
present on the table, Masha would eat. But if the food was 
abruptly removed in the midst of a meal, she would behave 
as if the meal had ended, thanking those in charge and piously 
blessing herself. If the food were returned, she would eat again. 
The pattern apparently was subject to indefinite repetition. My 
own impression is that Lucy or Washoe would be a far more 
interesting dinner companion than Masha, and that the com- 
parison of microcephalic humans with normal apes is not incon- 
sistent with some sort of Rubicon of intelligence. Of course, 
both the quality and the quantity of neural connections are 
probably vital for the sorts of intelligence that we can easily 
recognize. 

Recent experiments performed by James Dewson of the Stan- 
ford University School of Medicine and his colleagues give some 
physiological support to the idea of language centers in the 
simian neocortex — in particular, like humans, in the left 
hemisphere. Monkeys were trained to press a green light when 
they heard a hiss and a red light when they heard a tone. Some 
seconds after a sound was heard, the red or the green light 
would appear at some unpredictable position — different each 
time on the control panel. The monkey pressed the appropriate 
light and, in the case of a correct guess, was rewarded with a 
pellet of food. Then the time interval between hearing the sound 
and seeing the light was increased up to twenty seconds. In 
order to be rewarded, the monkeys now had to remember for 
twenty seconds which noise they had heard. Dewson’s team 
then surgically excised part of the so-called auditory associa- 
tion cortex from the left hemisphere of the neocortex in the 
temporal lobe. When retested, the monkeys had very poor recall 
of which sound they were then hearing. After less than a second 
they could not recall whether it was a hiss or a tone. The 
removal of a comparable part of the temporal lobe from the 
right hemisphere produced no effect whatever on this task. “It 
looks, Dewson was reported to say, “as if we removed the struc- 
ture in the monkeys’ brains that may be analogous to human 
language centers. Similar studies on rhesus monkeys, but using 


THE ABSTRACTIONS OF BEASTS 


117 


visual rather than auditory stimuli, seem to show no evidence 
of a difference between the hemispheres of the neocortex. 

Because adult chimpanzees are generally thought ( at least by 
zookeepers ) to be too dangerous to retain in a home or home 
environment, Washoe and other verbally accomplished chim- 
panzees have been involuntarily “retired” soon after reaching 
puberty. Thus we do not yet have experience with the adult 
language abilities of monkeys and apes. One of the most in- 
triguing questions is whether a verbally accomplished chim- 
panzee mother will be able to communicate language to her 
offspring. It seems very likely that this should be possible and 
that a community of chimps initially competent in gestural 
language could pass down the language to subsequent genera- 
tions. 

Where such communication is essential for survival, there is 
already some evidence that apes transmit extragenetic or cul- 
tural information. Jane Goodall observed baby chimps in the 
wild emulating the behavior of their mothers and learning the 
reasonably complex task of finding an appropriate twig and 
using it to prod into a termite’s nest so as to acquire some of 
these tasty delicacies. 

Differences in group behavior — something that it is very 
tempting to call cultural differences — have been reported 
among chimpanzees, baboons, macaques and many other 
primates. For example, one group of monkeys may know how to 
eat bird’s eggs, while an adjacent band of precisely the same 
species may not. Such primates have a few dozen sounds or 
cries, which are used for intra-group communication, with such 
meanings as “Flee; here is a predator.” But the sound of the 
cries differs somewhat from group to group: there are regional 
accents. 

An even more striking experiment was performed accidentally 
by Japanese primatologists attempting to relieve an overpopula- 
tion and hunger problem in a community of macaques on an 
island in south Japan. The anthropologists threw grains of 
wheat on a sandy beach. Now it is very difficult to separate 
wheat grains one by one from sand grains; such an effort might 


♦ 






THE ABSTRACTIONS OF BEASTS 


119 


even expend more energy than eating the collected wheat 
would provide. But one brilliant macaque, Imo, perhaps by 
accident or out of pique, threw handfuls of the mixture into the 
water. Wheat floats; sand sinks, a fact that Imo clearly noted. 
Through the sifting process she was able to eat well ( on a diet 
of soggy wheat, to be sure). While older macaques, set in their 
ways, ignored her, the younger monkeys appeared to grasp the 
importance of her discovery, and imitated it. In the next 
generation, the practice was more widespread; today all 
macaques on the island are competent at water sifting, an 
example of a cultural tradition among the monkeys. 

Earlier studies on Takasakiyama, a mountain in northeast 
Kyushu inhabited by macaques, show a similar pattern in cul- 
tural evolution. Visitors to Takasakiyama threw caramels 
wrapped in paper to the monkeys — a common practice in 
Japanese zoos, but one the Takasakiyama macaques had never 
before encountered. In the course of play, some young monkeys 
discovered how to unwrap the caramels and eat them. The 
habit was passed on successively to their playmates, their 
mothers, the dominant males (who among the macaques act as 
babysitters for the very young) and finally to the subadult 
males, who were at the furthest social remove from the monkey 
children. The process of acculturation took more than three 
years. In natural primate communities, the existing nonverbal 
communications are so rich that there is little pressure for the 
development of a more elaborate gestural language. But if 
gestural language were necessary for chimpanzee survival, 
there can be little doubt that it would be transmitted culturally 
down through the generations. 

I would expect a significant development and elaboration of 
language in only a few generations if all the chimps unable to 


A chimp with a long blade of grass, used as a tool to prod termites out 
of their nest. 

Photograph by Baron Hugo van Lawick. Copyright © National Geographic Society 


120 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


communicate were to die or fail to reproduce. Basic English 
corresponds to about 1,000 words. Chimpanzees are already 
accomplished in vocabularies exceeding 10 percent of that num- 
ber. Although a few years ago it would have seemed the most 
implausible science fiction, it does not appear to me out of the 
question that, after a few generations in such a verbal chimpan- 
zee community, there might emerge the memoirs of the natural 
history and mental life of a chimpanzee, published in English 
or Japanese (with perhaps an “as told to” after the by-line). 

If chimpanzees have consciousness, if they are capable of 
abstractions, do they not have what until now has been de- 
scribed as “human rights”? How smart does a chimpanzee have 
to be before killing him constitutes murder? What further prop- 
erties must he show before religious missionaries must consider 
him worthy of attempts at conversion? 

I recently was escorted through a large primate research 
laboratory by its director. We approached a long corridor 
lined, to the vanishing point as in a perspective drawing, with 
caged chimpanzees. They were one, two or three to a cage, and 
I am sure the accommodations were exemplary as far as such 
institutions ( or for that matter traditional zoos ) go. As we ap- 
proached the nearest cage, its two inmates bared their teeth and 
with incredible accuracy let fly great sweeping arcs of spittle, 
fairly drenching the lightweight suit of the facility’s director. 
They then uttered a staccato of short shrieks, which echoed 
down the corridor to be repeated and amplified by other caged 
chimps, who had certainly not seen us, until the corridor fairly 
shook with the screeching and banging and rattling of bars. 
The director informed me that not only spit is apt to fly in such 
a situation; and at his urging we retreated. 

I was powerfully reminded of those American motion pictures 
of the 1930s and 40s, set in some vast and dehumanized state 
or federal penitentiary, in which the prisoners banged their 
eating utensils against the bars at the appearance of the tryran- 
nical warden. These chimps are healthy and well-fed. If they 
are only animals, if they are beasts which abstract not, then 


THE ABSTRACTIONS OF BEASTS 


121 


my comparison is a piece of sentimental foolishness. But chim- 
panzees can abstract. Like other mammals, they are capable of 
strong emotions. They have certainly committed no crimes. I 
do not claim to have the answer, but I think it is certainly 
worthwhile to raise the question: Why, exactly, all over the 
civilized world, in virtually every major city, are apes in 
prison? 

For all we know, occasional viable crosses between humans 
and chimpanzees are possible . 0 The natural experiment must 
have been tried very infrequently, at least recently. If such off- 
spring are ever produced, what will their legal status be? The 
cognitive abilities of chimpanzees force us, I think, to raise 
searching questions about the boundaries of the community of 
beings to which special ethical considerations are due, and can, 
I hope, help to extend our ethical perspectives downward 
through the taxa on Earth and upwards to extraterrestrial 
organisms, if they exist. 


It is hard to imagine the emotional significance for chimpan- 
zees of learning language. Perhaps the closest analogy is the 
discovery of language by intelligent human beings with severe 
sensory organ impairment. While the depth of understanding, 
intelligence and sensitivity of Helen Keller, who could neither 
see, hear nor speak, greatly exceeds that of any chimpanzee, her 
account of her discovery of language carries some of the feel- 
ing tone that this remarkable development in primate languages 
may convey to the chimpanzee, particularly in a context where 
language enhances survival or is strongly reinforced. 

One day Miss Keller’s teacher prepared to take her for a 
walk: 

“Until fairly recently it was thought that humans had forty-eight 
chromosomes in an ordinary somatic cell. We now know that the correct 
number is forty-six. Chimps apparently really do have forty-eight chromo- 
somes, and in this case a viable cross of a chimpanzee and a human would 
in any event be rare. 


122 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


She brought me my hat, and I knew I was going out into the 
warm sunshine. This thought, if a wordless sensation may be 
called a thought, made me hop and skip with pleasure. 

We walked down the path to the well-house, attracted by the 
fragrance of the honeysuckle with which it was covered. Some- 
one was drawing water and my teacher placed my hand under 
the spout. As the cool stream gushed over my hand she spelled 
into the other the word water, first slowly, then rapidly. I stood 
still, my whole attention fixed upon the motion of her fingers. 
Suddenly I felt a misty consciousness as of something forgotten 
— a thrill of returning thought; and somehow the mystery of 
language was revealed to me. I knew then that W-A-T-E-R 
meant the wonderful cool something that was flowing over my 
hand. That living word awakened my soul, gave it light, hope, 
joy, set it free! There were barriers still, it is true, but barriers 
that in time could be swept away. 

I left the well-house eager to learn. Everything had a name, 
and each name gave birth to a new thought. As we returned 
into the house, every object which I touched seemed to quiver 
with life. That was because I saw everything with the strange, 
new sight that had come to me. 

Perhaps the most striking aspect of these three exquisite 
paragraphs is Helen Keller’s own sense that her brain had a 
latent capability for language, neediug only to be introduced to 
it. This essentially Platonic idea is also, as we have seen, con- 
sistent with what is known, from brain lesions, of the physiology 
of the neocortex; and also with the theoretical conclusions 
drawn by Noam Chomsky of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology from comparative linguistics and laboratory ex- 
periments on learning. In recent years it has become clear that 
the brains of nonhuman primates are similarly prepared, al- 
though probably not quite to the same degree, for the intro- 
duction of language. 

The long-term significance of teaching language to the other 
primates is difficult to overestimate. There is an arresting 
passage in Charles Darwin’s Descent of Man : “The difference 
in mind between man and the higher animals, great as it is, 
certainly is one of degree and not of kind. ... If it could be 


THE ABSTRACTIONS OF BEASTS 


123 


proved that certain high mental powers, such as the formation 
of general concepts, self-consciousness, et cetera, were abso- 
lutely peculiar to man, which seems extremely doubtful, it is not 
improbable that these qualities are merely the incidental results 
of other highly-advanced intellectual faculties; and these again 
mainly the results of the continued use of a perfect language.” 

This same opinion on the remarkable powers of language and 
human intercommunication can be found in quite a different 
place, the Genesis account of the Tower of Babel. God, in a 
strangely defensive attitude for an omnipotent being, is worried 
that men intend to build a tower that will reach to heaven. ( His 
attitude is similar to the concern he expresses after Adam eats 
the apple. ) To prevent Mankind from reaching heaven, at least 
metaphorically, God does not destroy the tower, as, for example, 
Sodom is destroyed. Instead, he says, “Behold, they are one 
people, and they have all one language; and this is only the 
beginning of what they will do; and nothing that they propose 
to do will now be impossible for them. Come, let us go down, 
and there confuse their language, that they may not understand 
one another’s speech” (Genesis 11:6-7). 

The continued use of a “perfect” language . . . What sort of 
culture, what kind of oral tradition would chimpanzees establish 
after a few hundred or a few thousand years of communal use 
of a complex gestural language? And if there were such an 
isolated continuous chimpanzee community, how would they 
begin to view the origin of language? Would the Gardners and 
the workers at the Yerkes Primate Center be remembered dimly 
as legendary folk heroes or gods of another species? Would 
there be myths, like those of Prometheus, Thoth, or Oannes, 
about divine beings who had given the gift of language to the 
apes? In fact, the instruction of chimpanzees in gestural lan- 
guage distinctly has some of the same emotion tone and reli- 
gious sense of the (truly fictional) episode in the movie and 
novel 2001: A Space Odt/ssei/ in which a representative of an 
advanced extraterrestrial civilization somehow instructs our 
hominid ancestors. 

Perhaps the most striking aspect of this entire subject is that 


124 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


there are nonhuman primates so close to the edge of language, 
so willing to learn, so entirely competent in its use and inventive 
in its application once the language is taught. But this raises a 
curious question: Why are they all on the edge? Why are there 
no nonhuman primates with an existing complex gestural lan- 
guage? One possible answer, it seems to me, is that humans have 
systematically exterminated those other primates who displayed 
signs of intelligence. (This may have been particularly true of 
the nonhuman primates who lived in the savannahs; the forests 
must have offered some protection to chimpanzees and gorillas 
from the depredations of man.) We may have been the agent 
of natural selection in suppressing the intellectual competition. 
I think we may have pushed back the frontiers of intelligence 
and language ability among the nonhuman primates until their 
intelligence became just indiscernible. In teaching gestural 
language to the chimpanzees, we are beginning a belated at- 
tempt to make amends. 


VI 

TAI 

OF DIM EDEN 






Very old are we men; 
Our dreams are tales 
Told in dim Eden . . . 

Walter de la Mare 
“All That’s Past” 


“Well, at any rate it’s a great comfort,” she said as 
she stepped under the trees, “after being so hot to 
get into the — into the — into what?” she went on, 
rather surprised at not being able to think of the 
word. “I mean to get under the — under the — under 
this, you know!” putting her hand on the trunk of 
the tree. “What does it call itself, I wonder?” . . . 
And now, who am I? I will remember, if I can! I’m 
determined to do it!” But being determined didn’t 
help her much, and all she could say, after a great 
deal of puzzling, was “L, I know it begins with L!” 

Lewis Carroll 

Alice Through the Looking Glass 


Come not between the dragon and his wrath. 

Wm. Shakespeare 
King Lear 


... At first 

Senseless as beasts I gave men sense, possessed them 
of mind . . . 

In the beginning, seeing, they saw amiss, and 
hearing, heard not, but like phantoms huddled 
In dreams, the perplexed story of their days 
Confounded. 

Aeschylus 
Prometheus Bound 


P 


rometheus is in a fit of righteous indignation. He 
has introduced civilization to a befuddled and 
superstitious mankind, and for his pains Zeus has 
chained him to a rock and set a vulture to pluck at 
his liver. In the passage following the above quotation, Prome- 
theus describes the principal gifts, other than fire, that he has 
bestowed on mankind. They are, in order: astronomy; mathe- 


matics; writing; the domestication of animals; the invention of 
chariots, sailing ships and medicine; and the discovery of divina- 
tion by dreams and other methods. The final gift strikes the 
modern ear as odd. Along with the account in Genesis of the 


exile from Eden, Prometheus Bound seems to be one of the 
major works in Western literature that present a viable allegory 
of the evolution of man — although in this case concentrating 
much more on the “evolver” than on the evolved. “Prometheus” 
is Greek for “foresight,” that quality claimed to reside in the 
frontal lobes of the neocortex; and foresight and anxiety are 
both present in Aeschylus’ character portrait. 




128 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


What is the connection between dreams and the evolution 
of man? Aeschylus is perhaps saying that our prehuman ances- 
tors lived their waking lives in a state akin to our dreaming 
lives; and that one of the principal benefits of the development 
of human intelligence is our ability to understand the true 
nature and import of dreams. 

There are, it seems, three principal states of mind in human 
beings: waking, sleeping and dreaming. An electroencephalo- 
graph, which detects brain waves, records quite distinct pat- 
terns of electrical activity in the brain during these three states.* 
Brain waves represent very small currents and voltages pro- 
duced by the electrical circuitry of the brain. Typical strengths 
of such brain-wave signals are measured in microvolts. Typical 
frequencies are between 1 and about 20 Hertz (or cycles per 
second) — less than the familiar 60 cycles per second frequency 
of alternating currents in electrical outlets in North America. 

But what is sleep good for? There is no doubt that if we stay 
up too long the body generates neurochemicals that literally 
force us to go to sleep. Sleep-deprived animals generate such 
molecules in their cerebrospinal fluid, and the cerebrospinal 
fluid of sleep-deprived animals induces sleep when injected 
into other animals who are perfectly wide awake. There must, 
then, be a very powerful reason for sleep. 

The conventional answer of physiology and folk medicine 

“The electroencephalograph (EEG) was invented by a German psy- 
chologist, Hans Berger, whose fundamental interest in the matter seems 
to have been telepathy. And, indeed, it can be used for a kind of radio 
telepathy; human beings have the capability to turn particular brain 
waves — for example, the alpha rhythm — on and off at will, although this 
feat requires a little training. With such training, an individual attached 
to an electroencephalograph and a radio transmitter could, in principle, 
send quite complex messages in a kind of alpha wave Morse code, merely 
by thinking them in the right way; and it is just possible that this method 
might have some practical use, such as permitting patients immobilized 
by severe stroke to communicate. For historical reasons, non-dreaming 
sleep is electroencephalographically characterized as “slow wave sleep,” 
and the dream state as “paradoxical sleep.” 


TALES OF DIM EDEN 


alike is that sleep has a restorative effect; it is an opportunity for 
the body to perform mental and physical housekeeping away 
from the needs of daily living. But the actual evidence for this 
view, apart from its common-sense plausibility, seems to be 
sparse. Furthermore, there are some worrisome aspects about 
the contention. For example, an animal is exceptionally 
vulnerable when sleeping. Granted that most animals sleep in 
nests, caves, holes in trees or logs or otherwise recessed or 
camouflaged locations. Even so, their helplessness while asleep 
remains high. Our nocturnal vulnerability is very evident; the 
Greeks recognized Morpheus and Thanatos, the gods of sleep 
and death, as brothers. 

Unless there is some exceptionally strong biological necessity 
for sleep, natural selection would have evolved beasts that sleep 
not. While there are some animals — the two-toed sloth, the 
armadillo, the opossum, and the bat — that, at least in states of 
seasonal torpor, sleep nineteen and twenty hours a day, there 
are others — the common shrew and Dali’s porpoise — that are 
said to sleep very little. There are also human beings who re- 
quire only one to three hours of sleep a night. They take second 
and third jobs, putter around at night while their spouses sink 
into exhaustion, and otherwise seem to lead full, alert and con- 
structive lives. Family histories suggest that these predisposi- 


The distinctive EEG patterns of a normal human being while awake, 
asleep, and dreaming. 



130 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


tions are hereditary. In one case, both a man and his little 
daughter are afflicted with this blessing or curse, much to the 
groggy consternation of his wife, who has since divorced him for 
a novel incompatibility. He retained custody of the daughter. 
Such examples suggest that the hypothesis of the recuperative 
function of sleep is at best not the whole story. 

Yet sleep is very ancient. In the electroencephalographic 
sense we share it with all the primates and almost all the other 
mammals and birds: it may extend back as far as the reptiles. 
Temporal-lobe epilepsy and its accompanying state of uncon- 
scious automatic behavior can be induced in some people by 
spontaneous electrical stimulation of the amygdala, deep below 
the temporal lobe, at frequencies of a few cycles per second ( a 
few Hertz). Seizures not very different from sleep have been 
reported when an epileptic patient is driving in an automobile 
near sunset or sunrise with a picket fence between him and the 
sun: at a certain speed the pickets intercept the sun at just the 
critical rate to produce a flicker at the resonant frequency for 
initiating such seizures. The circadian rhythm, the daily cycling 
of physiological function, is known to go back at least to animals 
as humble as mollusks. Since a state in some respects resembling 
dreaming can be induced by electrical stimulation of other 
limbic regions below the temporal lobe, as described below, 
centers that initiate both sleep and dreams may not be far apart 
in the recesses of the brain. 

There is some recent evidence that the two types of sleep, 
dreaming and dreamless, depend on the lifestyle of the animal. 
Truett Allison and Domenic Ciccheti of Yale University have 
found that predators are statistically much more likely to dream 
than prey, which are in turn much more likely to experience 
dreamless sleep. These studies are all of mammals and apply only 
to differences between, not within, species. In dream sleep, the 
animal is powerfully immobilized and remarkably unresponsive 
to external stimuli. Dreamless sleep is much shallower, and we 
have all witnessed cats or dogs cocking their ears to a sound 
when apparently fast asleep. It is also commonly held that when 


TALES OF DIM EDEN 


131 


sleeping dogs move their legs in a kind of running pattern, they 
are dreaming of the hunt. The fact that deep dream sleep is rare 
among prey today seems clearly to be a product of natural selec- 
tion. But organisms that are largely prey today may have had 
ancestors that were predators, and vice versa. Moreover, preda- 
tors are generally organisms with larger absolute brain mass 
and ratio of brain to body mass than their prey. It makes sense 
that today, when sleep is highly evolved, the stupid animals 
are less frequently immobilized by deep sleep than the smart 
ones. But why should they sleep deeply at all? Why should a 
state of such deep immobilization ever have evolved? 

Perhaps one useful hint about the original function of sleep is 
to be found in the fact that dolphins and whales and aquatic 
mammals in general seem to sleep very little. There is, by and 
large, no place to hide in the ocean. Could it be that, rather than 
increasing an animal’s vulnerability, the function of sleep is to 
decrease it? Wilse Webb of the University of Florida and Bay 
Meddis of London University have suggested this to be the case. 
The sleeping style of each organism is exquisitely adapted to the 
ecology of the animal. It is conceivable that animals who 
are too stupid to be quiet on their own initiative are, during 
periods of high risk, immobilized by the implacable arm of 
sleep. The point seems particularly clear for the young of preda- 
tory animals; not only are baby tigers covered with a superbly 
effective protective coloration, they also sleep a great deal. This 
is an interesting notion and probably at least partly true. It does 
not explain everything. Why do lions, who have few natural 
enemies, sleep? This question is not a very damaging objection 
because lions may have evolved from animals that were not the 
kings of beasts. Likewise, adolescent gorillas, who have little 
to fear, nevertheless construct nests each night — perhaps be- 
cause they evolved from more vulnerable predecessors. Or 
perhaps, once, the ancestors of lions and gorillas feared still 
more formidable predators. 

The immobilization hypothesis seems particularly apt in light 
of the evolution of mammals, who arose in an epoch dominated 


132 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 



Courtesy of The American Museum of Natural History 

A nest of Protoceratops eggs from the Cretaceous of the Mongolian 
People’s Republic. 


by hissing, thundering and altogether nightmarish reptiles. But 
nearly all reptiles are cold-blooded* and, except in the tropics, 
are forced into noctural immobility. Mammals are warm- 
blooded and able to function at night. The nontropical nocturnal 
ecological niches may have been almost untenanted in the 
Triassic Period, some two hundred million years ago. Indeed, 
Harry Jerison has suggested that the evolution of mammals 
was accompanied by the development of then extremely sophis- 
ticated ( and now commonplace ) versions of hearing and smell, 
senses for perceiving distances and objects at night; and that 
the limbic system evolved from the necessity of processing the 
rich array of data from these newly elaborated senses. ( A great 
deal of the visual-information processing in reptiles is done not 

“Robert Bakker, a paleontologist at Harvard University, suggests that 
at least some dinosaurs were significantly warm-blooded; even so, it 
seems likely that they were not as insensitive to diurnal temperature 
change as mammals are, and that they slowed down substantially at night. 


TALES OF DIM EDEN 


133 


in the brain but in the retina; the optical processing apparatus 
in the neocortex was largely a later evolutionary development. ) 

Perhaps it was essential for the early mammals to be im- 
mobilized and hidden during the daylight hours that were ruled 
by predatory reptiles. I am picturing a late Mesozoic landscape 
in which the mammals sleep fitfully by day and the reptiles by 
night. But at night even humble carnivorous protomammals 
must have posed a real threat to the cold-immobilized reptiles, 
and particularly to their eggs. 

Judged by their endocranial volumes (see figure on page 
38 b the dinosaurs were, compared to mammals, remarkably 
stupid. To take some “well-known” examples, Tyrannosaurus 
rex had a brain volume of about 200 cubic centimeters (cc); 
Brachiosaurus, 150 cc; Triceratops, 70 cc; Diplodocus, 50 cc; 
Stegosaurus, 30 cc. Not one approached a chimpanzee in ab- 
solute brain mass; Stegosaurus, which weighed two metric tons, 
was probably far more stupid than a rabbit. When the large body 


A reconstruction of baby Protoceratops hatching. 


Courtesy of The American Museum of Natural History 




A drawing of Saurornithoides, a small intelligent dinosaur, here shown 
catching mammals. Specimens are known from Canada and from the 
Mongolian People’s Republic in the Cretaceous. 

weights of the dinosaurs are taken into account, the smallness 
of their brains becomes even more striking: Tyrannosaurus 
weighed 8 metric tons; Diplodocus, 12; and Brachiosaurus, 87. 
The ratio of brain to body weight in Brachiosaurus was ten 
thousand times smaller than that of man. Just as sharks are the 
largest-brained fish for their body weight, the carnivorous 
dinosaurs such as Tyrannosaurus were relatively larger-brained 
than such herbivores as Diplodocus and Brachiosaurus. I am 
sure that Tyrannosaurus was an efficient and terrifying killing 
machine. But despite their awesome aspect, the dinosaurs 
look vulnerable to dedicated - and intelligent adversaries- — - 
such as the early mammals. 

Our Mesozoic scene has a curiously vampiric quality with 
the carnivorous reptiles hunting the smart sleeping mammals 





TALES OF DIM EDEN 


135 


by day, and the carnivorous mammals hunting the stupid im- 
mobile reptiles by night. While the reptiles buried their eggs, 
it is unlikely that they actively protected either eggs or young. 
There are very few accounts of such behavior even in con- 
temporary reptiles, and it is difficult to picture Tyrannosaurus 
rex brooding on a clutch of eggs. For these reasons, the mam- 
mals may have won the primordial war of the vampires; at least 
some paleontologists believe that the demise of the dinosaurs 
was accelerated by nocturnal predation on reptilian eggs by 
the early mammals. Two chicken eggs* for breakfast may be 
a ll — a t least on the surface — -that is left of this ancient mam- 
malian cuisine. 


The most intelligent of the dinosaurs by the criterion of brain 
to body mass are the Saurornithoides, whose brain mass was 
typically about 50 grams to a body mass of about 50 kilograms, 
placing them near the ostrich in the figure on page 39. Indeed, 
they resembled ostriches. It might be very illuminating to ex- 
amine fossil endocasts of their braincases. They probably hunted 
small animals for food and used the four fingers of their hand- 
like appendages for many different tasks. (See illustration 
above. ) 

They are interesting beasts to speculate about. If the dino- 
saurs had not all been mysteriously extinguished some sixty-five 
million years ago, would the Saurornithoides have continued to 
evolve into increasingly intelligent forms? Would they have 
learned to hunt large mammals collectively and thus perhaps 
have prevented the great proliferation of mammals that 
followed the end of the Mesozoic Age? If it had not been for the 
extinction of the dinosaurs, would the dominant life forms on 
Earth today be descendants of Saurornithoides, writing and 
reading books, speculating on what would have happened had 
the mammals prevailed? Would the dominant forms think that 

“In fact, the birds are almost certainly the principal living descendants 
of the dinosaurs. 


136 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


base 8 arithmetic was quite natural, but base 10 a frill taught 
only in the “New Math”? 

A great deal of what we consider important about the last 
few tens of millions of years of Earth’s history seems to hinge on 
the extinction of the dinosaurs. There are literally dozens of 
scientific hypotheses that attempt to explain this event, which 
appears to have been remarkably rapid and thorough for both 
land and water forms. All the explanations proposed seem to be 
only partly satisfactory. They range from massive climatic 
change to mammalian predation to the extinction of a plant with 
apparent laxative properties, in which case the dinosaurs died 
of constipation. 

One of\the most interesting and promising hypotheses, first 
suggested qy I. S. Shklovskii of the Institute for Cosmic Re- 
search, Soviet Academy of Sciences, Moscow, is that the dino- 
saurs died because of a nearby supernova event — -the explosion 
of a dying star some tens of light-years away, which resulted in 
an immense flux of high energy charged particles that entered 
our atmosphere, changed its properties, and, perhaps by de- 
stroying the atmospheric ozone, let in lethal quantities of 
solar ultraviolet radiation. Nocturnal animals, such as the mam- 
mals of the time, and deep-sea animals, such as fish, could 
have survived this higher ultraviolet intensity; but daytime 


A reconstruction of a Cretaceous landscape in a swampy region in 
Western Canada. Most of the dinosaurs shown are bipedal and herbivor- 
ous. So far as we know, all these forms became extinct shortly thereafter. 



TALES OF DIM EDEN 


137 


animals that lived on land or near the surface of the waters 
would have been preferentially destroyed. Such a disaster 
would be aptly named — the word itself means “bad star.” 

If this sequence of events is correct, the major course of 
biological evolution on the Earth in the last sixty-five million 
years, and indeed the very existence of human beings, can be 
traced to the death of a distant sun. Perhaps other planets 
circled that star; perhaps one of those planets enjoyed a thriv- 
ing biology tortuously evolved over billions of years. The 
supernova explosion would surely have extinguished all life on 
that planet and probably even driven its atmosphere into space. 
Do we owe our existence to a mighty stellar catastrophe that 
elsewhere destroyed biospheres and worlds? 


After the extinction of the dinosaurs, mammals moved into 
daytime ecological niches. The primate fear of the dark must 
be a comparatively recent development. Washburn has re- 
ported that infant baboons and other young primates appear to 
be born with only three inborn fears — of falling, snakes, and 
the dark — corresponding respectively to the dangers posed by 
Newtonian gravitation to tree-dwellers, by our ancient enemies 
the reptiles, and by mammalian nocturnal predators, which 
must have been particularly terrifying for the visually oriented 
primates. 

If the vampiric hypothesis is true — and it is at best a likely 
hypothesis — the function of sleep is built deeply into the mam- 
malian brain; from earliest mammalian times, sleep played a 
fundamental role in survival. Since for primitive mammals sleep- 
less nights would have been more dangerous for the survival of 
the taxon than sexless nights, sleep should be a more powerful 
drive than sex — which, at least in most of us, it seems to be. But 
eventually mammals evolved to a point where sleep could be 
modified by changed circumstances. With the extinction of the 
dinosaurs, daylight suddenly became a benevolent environment 
for the mammals. Daytime immobilization was no longer com- 
pulsory, and a wide variety of sleep patterns slowly developed, 


138 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


including the contemporary correlation of mammalian predators 
with extensive dreaming and mammalian prey with a more 
watchful dreamless sleep. Perhaps those people who can do 
with only a few hours’ sleep a night are the harbingers of a new 
human adaptation that will take full advantage of the twenty- 
four hours of the day. I, for one, freely confess envy for such an 
adaptation. 


These conjectures on the origins of the mammals constitute 
a kind of scientific myth: they may have some germ of truth in 
them, but they are unlikely to be the whole story. That scientific 
myths make contact with more ancient myths may or may not 
be a coincidence. It is entirely possible that we are able to in- 
vent scientific myths only because we have previously been ex- 
posed to the other sort. Nevertheless, I cannot resist connecting 
this account of the origin of mammals with another curious 
aspect of the Genesis myth of the exile from Eden. Because it 
is a reptile, of course, that offers the fruit of the knowledge of 
good and evil — abstract and moral neocortical functions — to 
Adam and Eve. 

There are today a few remaining large reptiles on Earth, the 
most striking of which is the Komodo dragon of Indonesia: 
cold-blooded, not very bright, but a predator exhibiting a 
chilling fixity of purpose. With immense patience, it will 
stalk a sleeping deer or boar, then suddenly slash a hind leg and 
hang on until the prey bleeds to death. Prey is tracked by scent, 
and a hunting dragon lumbers and sashays, head down, its 
forked tongue flicking over the ground for chemical traces. The 
largest adults weight about 135 kilograms (300 pounds), are 
three meters (about 10 feet) long and live perhaps to be 
centenarians. To protect its eggs, the dragon digs trenches from 
two to as much as nine meters ( almost 30 feet ) deep — probably 
a defense against egg-eating mammals ( and themselves : Adults 
are known occasionally to stalk a nest-hole, waiting for the 
newly hatched young to emerge and provide a little delicacy 



Courtesy of The American Museum of Natural History 


Varanus komodoensis, the Komodo dragon, Komodo Island, Indonesia. 


for lunch). As another clear adaptation to predators, the 
dragon hatchlings live in trees. 

The remarkable elaboration of these adaptations shows 
clearly that dragons are in trouble on the planet Earth. The 
Komodo dragon lives in the wild only in the Lesser Sunda 
Islands. * There are only about 2,000 of them left. The obscurity 

“It is in the Greater Sunda Islands — more specifically Java — that the 
first specimen of Homo erectus, with an endocranial volume of almost 
1,000 cc, was found by E. Dubois in 1891. 



St. George slaying the Dragon, by Donatello from the Chiesa di Or San 
Michele, Florence. 


of their locale immediately suggests that dragons are near ex- 
tinction because of mammalian, chiefly human, predation, a 
conclusion borne out by their history over the last two cen- 
turies. All dragons with less extreme adaptations or less remote 
habitats are dead. I even wonder whether the systematic separa- 
tion of brain mass for a given body mass between mammals and 
reptiles (see chart on page 38) might not be the result of a 
systematic extinction of bright dragons by mammalian preda- 
tors. In any case, it is very likely that the population of large 
reptiles has been declining steadily since the end of the Meso- 
zoic Age, and that there were many more of them even one or 
two thousand years ago than there are today. 

The pervasiveness of dragon myths in the folk legends of 
many cultures is probably no accident.® The implacable mutual 


“Curiously, the first representative skull of Peking man — the Homo 
erectus whose remains are clearly associated with the use of fire — was 
discovered by Weng Chung Pei late in 1929 in Sinkiang Province, China, 
in a place called the Mountain of Dragons. 


TALES OF DIM EDEN 


141 


hostility between man and dragon, as exemplified in the myth 
of St. George, is strongest in the West. (In chapter 3 of the 
Book of Genesis, God ordains an eternal enmity between rep- 
tiles and humans. ) But it is not a Western anomaly. It is a 
worldwide phenomenon. Is it only an accident that the common 
human sounds commanding silence or attracting attention seem 
strangely imitative of the hissing of reptiles? Is it possible that 
dragons posed a problem for our protohuman ancestors of a few 
million years ago, and that the terror they evoked and the 
deaths they caused helped bring about the evolution of human 
intelligence? Or does the metaphor of the serpent refer to the 
use of the aggressive and ritualistic reptilian component of our 
brain in the further evolution of the neocortex? With one excep- 
tion, the Genesis account of the temptation by a reptile in Eden 
is the only instance in the Bible of humans understanding the 
language of animals. When we feared the dragons, were we 
fearing a part of ourselves? One way or another, there were 
dragons in Eden. 


The Temptation by a man-serpent and the expulsion from Eden. Michael- 
angelo, from the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. 


SCALA NEW YORK/FLORENCE 



142 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


The most recent dinosaur fossil is dated at about sixty 
million years ago. The family of man (but not the genus Homo) 
is some tens of millions of years old. Could there have been man- 
like creatures who actually encountered Tyrannosaurus rex? 
Could there have been dinosaurs that escaped the extinctions 
in the late Cretaceous Period? Could the pervasive dreams and 
common fears of “monsters,” which children develop shortly 
after they are able to talk, be evolutionary vestiges of quite 
adaptive — baboonlike — responses to dragons and owls?® 

What functions do dreams serve today? One view, pub- 
lished in a reputable scientific paper, holds that the func- 
tion of dreams is to wake us up a little, every now and 
then, to see if anyone is about to eat us. But dreams occupy such 
a relatively small part of normal sleep that this explanation 
does not seem very compelling. Moreover, as we have seen, the 
evidence points just the other way: today it is the mammalian 
predators, not the mammalian prey, who characteristically have 
dream-filled sleep. Much more plausible is the computer-based 
explanation that dreams are a spillover from the unconscious 
processing of the day’s experience, from the brain’s decision on 
how much of the daily events temporarily stored in a kind of 
buffer to emplace in long-term memory. The events of yester- 
day frequently run through my dreams; the events of two days 
ago, much more rarely. However, the buffer-dumping model 
seems unlikely to be the whole story, because it does not ex- 
plain the disguises that are so characteristic of the symbolic 
language of dreams, a point first stressed by Freud. It also does 

“Since writing this passage I have discovered that Darwin expressed 
a similar thought: “May we not suspect that the vague but very real 
feais of children, which are quite independent of experience, are in- 
herited effects of real dangers and abject superstitions during ancient 
savage times? It is quite conformable with what we know of the trans- 
mission of formerly well-developed characters, that they should appear 
at an early period of life, and afterwards disappear” — like gill slits in 
human embryology. 


TALES OF DIM EDEN 


143 


not explain the powerful affect or emotions of dreams; I believe 
there are many people who have been far more thoroughly 
frightened by their dreams than by anything they have ever 
experienced while awake. 

The buffer-dumping and memory-storage functions of dreams 
have some interesting social implications. The American 
psychiatrist Ernest Hartmann of Tufts University has provided 
anecdotal but reasonably persuasive evidence that people who 
are engaged in intellectual activities during the day, especially 
unfamiliar intellectual activities, require more sleep at night, 
while, by and large, those engaged in mainly repetitive and 
intellectually unchallenging tasks are able to do with much less 
sleep. However, in part for reasons of organizational con- 
venience, modern societies are structured as if all humans had 
the same sleep requirements; and in many parts of the world 
there is a satisfying sense of moral rectitude in rising early. 
The amount of sleep required for buffer dumping would then 
depend on how much we have both thought and experienced 
since the last sleep period. (There is no evidence that the 
causality runs backwards: people drugged with phenobarbital 
are not reported, during interstitial waking periods, to perform 
unusual intellectual accomplishments. ) In this respect it would 
be interesting to examine individuals with very low sleep needs 
to determine whether the fraction of sleep time they spend 
dreaming is larger than it is for those with normal sleep require- 
ments, and to determine whether their amount of sleep and 
dream time increases with the quality and quantity of their 
learning experiences while awake. 

Michel Jouvet, a French neurologist at the University of 
Lyons, has found that dream sleep is triggered in the pons, 
which, while it resides in the hindbrain, is a late and essentially 
mammalian evolutionary development. On the other hand, 
Penfield has found that electrical stimulation deep into and 
below the temporal lobe in the neocortex and limbic complex 
can produce a waking state in epileptics very similar to that of 
dreams denuded of their symbolic and fantastic aspects. It can 


144 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


also induce the deja vu experience. Much of dream affect, in- 
cluding fear, can also be induced by such electrical stimulation. 

I once had a dream that will tantalize me forever. I dreamt 
I was idly thumbing through a thick history text. I could tell 
from the illustrations that the work was moving slowly, in the 
usual manner of such textbooks, through the centuries : classical 
times, Middle Ages, Renaissance and so on, gradually approach- 
ing the modern era. But then there was World War II with 
about two hundred pages left. With mounting excitement I 
worked my way more deeply into the work until I was sure that 
I had passed my own time. It was a history book that included 
the future— like turning the December 31 page of the Cosmic 
Calendar and finding a fully detailed January 1. Breathlessly I 
attempted literally to read the future. But it was impossible. I 
could make out individual words. I could even discern the serifs 
on the individual characters. But I could not put the letters 
together into words or words together into sentences. I was 
alexic. 

Perhaps this is simply a metaphor of the unpredictability of 
the future. But my invariable dream experience is that I am 
unable to read. I can recognize, for example, a stop sign by its 
color and its octagonal shape, but I cannot read the word stop, 
although I know it is there. I have the impression of under- 
standing the meaning of a page of type, but not by reading it 
word by word or sentence by sentence. I cannot reliably per- 
form even simple arithmetic operations in the dream state. I 
make a variety of verbal confusions of no apparent symbolic 
significance, like mixing up Schumann and Schubert. I am a 
little aphasic and entirely alexic. Not everyone I know has the 
same cognitive impairment in the dream state, but people often 
have some impairment. (Incidentally, individuals who are 
blind from birth have auditory, not visual dreams. ) The neo- 
cortex is by no means altogether turned off in the dream state, 
but it certainly seems to suffer important malfunctions. 

The seeming fact that mammals and birds both dream while 
their common ancestor, the reptiles, do not is surely noteworthy. 
Major evolution beyond the reptiles has been accompanied by 


TALES OF DIM EDEN 


145 


and perhaps requires dreams. The electrically distinctive sleep 
of birds is episodic and brief. If they dream, they dream for 
only about a second at a time. But birds are, in an evolutionary 
sense, much closer to reptiles than mammals are. If we knew 
only about mammals, the argument would be more shaky; but 
when both major taxonomic groups that have evolved from the 
reptiles find themselves compelled to dream, we must take the 
coincidence seriously. Why should an animal that has evolved 
from a reptile have to dream while other animals do not? Could 
it be because the reptilian brain is still present and functioning? 

It is extremely rare in the dream state that we bring ourselves 
up short and say, “This is only a dream.” By and large we invest 
the dream content with reality. There are no rules of internal 
consistency that dreams are required to follow. The dream is a 
world of magic and ritual, passion and anger, but very rarely 
of skepticism and reason. In the metaphor of the triune brain, 
dreams are partially a function of the R-complex and the limbic 
cortex, but not of the rational part of the neocortex. 

Experiments suggest that as the night wears on our dreams 
engage increasingly earlier material from our past, reaching 
back to childhood and infancy. At the same time the primary 
process and emotional content of the dream also increase. We 
are much more likely to dream of the passions of the cradle just 
before awakening than just after falling asleep. This looks very 
much as if the integration of the day’s experience into our 
memory, the forging of new neural links, is either an easier or a 
more urgent task. As the night wears on and this function is 
completed, the more affecting dreams, the more bizarre ma- 
terial, the fears and lusts and other powerful emotions of the 
dream material emerge. Late at night, when it is very still and 
the obligatory daily dreams have been dreamt, the gazelles 
and the dragons begin to stir. 

One of the most significant tools in studying the dream state 
was developed by William Dement, a Stanford University 
psychiatrist, who is as sane as it is possible for a human being 
to be, but who bears an exceedingly interesting name for a 
man of his profession. The dream state is accompanied by rapid 


146 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


eye movements (REM), which can be detected by electrodes 
taped lightly over the eyelids in sleep, and by a particular 
brain wave pattern on the EEG. Dement has found that every- 
one dreams many times each night. On awakening, an individ- 
ual in the midst of REM sleep will usually remember his dream. 
Even people who claim never to dream have been discovered 
by REM and EEG criteria to dream as much as anyone else; 
and, when awakened at appropriate times, they admit with 
some surprise to having dreamt. The human brain is in a distinct 
physiological state while dreaming, and we dream rather often. 
While perhaps 20 percent of the subjects awakened during 
REM sleep do not recall their dreams, and some perhaps 10 per- 
cent of subjects awakened during non-REM sleep report 
dreams, we will, for convenience, identify REM and accom- 
panying EEG patterns with the dream state. 

There is some evidence that dreaming is necessary. When 
people or other mammals are deprived of REM sleep (by 
awakening them as soon as the characteristic REM and EEG 
dream patterns emerge ) , the number of initiations of the dream 
state per night goes up, and, in severe cases, daytime hallucina- 
tions that is, waking dreams — occur. I have mentioned that 
the REM and EEG patterns of dreams are brief in birds and 
absent in reptiles. Dreams seem to be primarily a mammalian 
function. What is more, dream sleep is most vigorously engaged 
in by human beings in the early postnatal period. Aristotle 
stated quite positively that infants do not dream at all. On the 
contrary, we find that they may be dreaming most of the time. 
Full-term newborn babies spend more than half their sleep 
time in the REM dream state. In infants born a few weeks pre- 
mature, the dream time is three-quarters or more of the total 
sleep time. Earlier in its intrauterine existence, the fetus may 
be dreaming all the time. (Indeed, newborn kittens are ob- 
served to spend all of their sleep time in the REM stage.) 
Recapitulation would then suggest that dreaming is an evolu- 
tionarily early and basic mammalian function. 

There is another connection between infancy and dreams: 


TALES OF DIM EDEN 


147 


both are followed by amnesia. When we emerge from either 
state, we have great difficulty remembering what we have 
experienced. In both cases, I would suggest, the left hemisphere 
of the neocortex, which is responsible for analytic recollection, 
has been functioning ineffectively. An alternative explanation 
is that in both dreams and early childhood we experience a kind 
of traumatic amnesia: The experiences are too painful to re- 
member. But many dreams we forget are very pleasant, and it 
is difficult to believe that infancy is that unpleasant. Also some 
children seem capable of remembering extremely early expe- 
riences. Memories of events late in the first year of life are not 
extremely rare, and there are possible examples of even earlier 
recollections. At age three, my son Nicholas was asked for the 
earliest event he could recall and replied in a hushed tone while 
staring into middle distance, “It was red, and I was very cold.” 
He was born by Caesarean section. It is probably very unlikely, 
but I wonder whether this could just possibly be a true birth 
memory. At any rate, I think it is much more likely that child- 
hood and dream amnesia arise from the fact that in those states 
our mental lives are determined almost entirely by the R- 
complex, the limbic system and the right cerebral hemisphere. 
In earliest childhood, the neocortex is underdeveloped; in 
amnesia, it is impaired. 

There is a striking correlation of penile or clitoral erection 
with REM sleep, even when the manifest dream content has 
no overt sexual aspects whatever. In primates, such erections 
are connected with sex (of course!), aggression and the main- 
tenance of social hierarchies. I think that when we dream there 
is a part of us engaged in activities rather like those of the 
squirrel monkeys I saw in Paul MacLean’s laboratory. The 
R-complex is functioning in the dreams of humans; the dragons 
can be heard, hissing and rasping, and the dinosaurs thunder 
still. 

One excellent test of the merit of scientific ideas is their 
subsequent validation. A theory is put forward on fragmentary 
evidence, then an experiment is performed, the outcome of 


148 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


which the proposer of the theory could not know. If the experi- 
ment confirms the original idea, this is usually taken as strong 
support for the theory. Freud held that the great majority, 
perhaps all, of the psychic energy” of our primary-process 
emotions and dream material is sexual in origin. The absolutely 
essential role of sexual interest in providing for the propagation 
of the species makes this idea neither as silly nor as depraved as 
it appeared to many of Freud s Victorian contemporaries. Carl 
Gustav Jung, for example, held that Freud had severely over- 
stated the primacy of sex in the affairs of the unconscious. But 
now, three-quarters of a century later, experiments in the 
laboratories of Dement and other psychologists appear to sup- 
port Freud. It would, I think, require a very dedicated puritan- 
ism to deny some connection between penile or clitoral 
erection and sex. It seems to follow that sex and dreams are not 
casually or incidentally connected but rather have deep and 
fundamental ties although dreams certainly partake of ritual, 
aggressive and hierarchical material as well. Particularly con- 
sidering the state of sexual repression in late-nineteenth-century 
Viennese society, many of Freud’s insights seem hard-won and 
courageous as well as valid. 

Statistical studies have been made of the most common 
categories of dreams — studies which, at least to some extent, 
ought to illuminate the nature of dreams. In a survey of the 
dreams of college students, the following were, in order, the 
five most frequent types: (1) falling; (2) being pursued or 
attacked; (3) attempting repeatedly and unsuccessfully to per- 
form a task; (4) various academic learning experiences; and 
(5) diverse sexual experiences. Number (4) on this list seems of 
special and particular concern to the group being sampled. 
The others, while sometimes actually encountered in the lives 
of undergraduates, are likely to be applicable generally, even 
to nonstudents. 

The fear of falling seems .clearly connected with our 
arboreal origins and is a fear we apparently share with other 
primates. If you live in a tree, the easiest way to die is simply to 


TALES OF DIM EDEN 


149 


forget the danger of falling. The other three categories of 
most common dreams are particularly interesting because they 
correspond to aggressive, hierarchical, ritualistic and sexual 
functions — the realm of the R-complex. Another provocative 
statistic is that almost half of the people queried reported 
dreams about snakes, the only nonhuman animal rating a 
category all to itself in the twenty most common dreams. It is, 
of course, possible that many snake dreams have a straight- 
forward Freudian interpretation. However, two- thirds of the 
respondents reported explicitly sexual dreams. Since, according 
to Washburn, young primates exhibit an untaught fear of 
snakes, it is easy to wonder whether the dream world does not 
point directly as well as indirectly to the ancient hostility be- 
tween reptiles and mammals. 


There is one hypothesis that seems to me consistent with all 
the foregoing facts: The evolution of the limbic system involved 
a radically new way of viewing the world. The survival of the 
early mammals depended on intelligence, daytime unobtrusive- 
ness, and devotion to the young. The world as perceived 
through the R-complex was quite a different world. Because of 
the accretionary nature of the evolution of the brain, R-complex 
functions could be utilized or partially bypassed but not 
ignored. Thus, an inhibition center developed below what 
in humans is the temporal lobe, to turn off much of the function- 
ing of the reptilian brain; and an activation center evolved in 
the pons to turn on the R-complex, but harmlessly, during 
sleep. This view, of course, has some notable points of similarity 
to Freud’s picture of the repression of the id by the superego 
(or of the unconscious by the conscious), with expressions of 
the id made most clearly manifest in slips of the tongue, free 
associations, dreams and the like — that is, during the interstices 
of superego repression. 

With the large-scale development of the neocortex in higher 
mammals and primates, some neocortical involvement in the 


15» 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


dream state developed — a symbolic language is, after all, still a 
language. (This is related to the different functions of the two 
hemispheres of the neocortex, described in the following chap- 
ter. ) But the dream imagery contained significant sexual, ag- 
gressive, hierarchical and ritualistic elements. The fantastic 
material in the dream world may be connected with the near- 
absence of direct sensory stimulation during dreams. There is 
very little reality testing in the dream state. The prevalence of 
dreams in infants would, in this view, be because, in infancy, 
the analytic part of the neocortex is barely working. The 
absence of dreams in reptiles would be because there is no 
repression of the dream state in reptiles; they are, as Aeschylus 
described our ancestors, “dreaming” in their waking state. I 
believe this idea can explain the strangeness — that is, the dif- 
ferences from our waking verbal consciousness— of the dream 
state; its mammalian and human neonatal localization; its 
physiology; and its pervasiveness in man. 

We are descended from reptiles and mammals both. In the 
daytime repression of the R-complex and in the nighttime 
stirring of the dream dragons, we may each of us be replaying 
the hundred-million-year-old warfare between the reptiles and 
the mammals. Only the times of day of the vampiric hunt have 
been reversed. 

Human beings exhibit enough reptilian behavior as it is. If 
we gave full rein to the reptilian aspects of our nature, we 
would clearly have a low survival potential. Because the R- 
complex is woven so intimately into the fabric of the brain, its 
functions cannot be entirely avoided for long. Perhaps the 
dream state permits, in our fantasy and its reality, the R-com- 
plex to function regularly, as if it were still in control. 

If this is true, I wonder, after Aeschylus, if the waking state 
of other mammals is very much like the dream state of humans 

where we can recognize signs, such as the feel of running 
water and the smell of honeysuckle, but have an extremely 
limited repertoire of symbols such as words; where we en- 
counter vivid sensory and emotional images and active intuitive 


TALES OF DIM EDEN 


151 


understanding, but very little rational analysis; where we are 
unable to perform tasks requiring extensive concentration; 
where we experience short attention spans and frequent distrac- 
tions and, most of all, a very feeble sense of individuality or 
self, which gives way to a pervading fatalism, a sense of unpre- 
dictable buffeting by uncontrollable events. If this is where we 
have come from, we have come very far. 



VII 

LOVERS 

AND MADMEN 







Lovers and madmen have such seething brains 
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend 
More than cool reason ever comprehends. 

The lunatic, the lover, and the poet 
Are of imagination all compact . . . 

Wm, Shakespeare 
A Midsummer Night’s Dream 


Mere poets are as sottish as mere drunkards are, who 
live in a continual mist, without seeing or judging 
anything clearly. A man should be learned in several 
sciences, and should have a reasonable, philosoph- 
ical, and in some measure a mathematical head, to 
be a complete and excellent poet. . . . 

John Dryden 

“Notes and Observations on 
The Empress of Morocco,” 1674 



loodhounds have a widely celebrated ability to 
track by smell. They are presented with a "trace” — 
a scrap of clothing belonging to the target, the lost 
| child or the escaped convict — and then, barking, 
bound joyously and accurately down the trail. Canines and 
many other hunting animals have such an ability in extremely 
well-developed form. The original trace contains an olfactory 
cue, a smell. A smell is merely the perception of a particular 
variety of molecule — in this case, an organic molecule. For the 
bloodhound to track, it must be able to sense the difference in 
smell — in characteristic body molecules — between the target 
and a bewildering and noisy background of other molecules, 
some from other humans who have gone the same way ( includ- 
ing those organizing the tracking expedition) and some from 
other animals ( including the dog itself ) . The number of mole- 
cules shed by a human being while walking is relatively small. 
Yet even on a fairly “cold” trail — say, several hours after the 
disappearance — bloodhounds can track successfully. 

This remarkable ability involves extremely sensitive olfactory 
detection, a function, as we saw earlier, performed well even 
by insects. But what is most striking about the bloodhound and 
different from insects is the richness of its discriminative ability, 
its aptitude in distinguishing among many different smells, each 
in an immense background of other odors. The bloodhound per- 
forms a sophisticated cataloging of molecular structure; it dis- 
tinguishes the new molecule from a very large library of other 
molecules previously smelled. What is more, the bloodhound 




156 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


needs only a minute or less to familiarize itself to the smell, 
which it can then remember for extensive periods of time. 

The olfactory recognition of individual molecules is appar- 
ently accomplished by individual nasal receptors sensitive to par- 
ticular functional groups, or parts, of organic molecules. One re- 
ceptor, for example, may be sensitive to COOH, another to NH 2 , 
and so on. ( C stands for carbon, H for hydrogen, O for oxygen 
and N for nitrogen. ) The various appurtenances and projections 
of the complex molecules apparently adhere to different molec- 
ular receptors in the nasal mucosa, and the detectors for all the 
functional groups combine to put together a kind of collective 
olfactory image of the molecule. This is an extremely sophisti- 
cated sensory system. The most elaborate man-made device of 
this sort, the gas chromatograph/ mass spectrometer, has in gen- 
eral neither the sensitivity nor the discriminative ability of the 
bloodhound, although substantial progress is being made in this 
technology. The olfactory system of animals has evolved into 
its present sophistication because of strong selection pressures. 
Early detection of mates, predators and prey is a matter of life 
and death for the species. The sense of smell is very ancient, 
and, indeed, much of the early evolution above the level 
of the neural chassis may have been spurred by selection 
pressure for such molecular detection: the distinctive olfactory 
bulbs in the brain ( see figure on page 52 ) are among the first 
components of the neocortex to have developed in the history of 
life. Indeed, the limbic system was called the “rhinencephalon,” 
the smell-brain, by Herrick. 

The sense of smell is not nearly so well developed in humans 
as in bloodhounds. Despite the massiveness of our brains, our 
olfactory bulbs are smaller than those of many other animals, 
and it is clear that smell plays a very minor role in our everyday 
lives. The average person is able to distinguish relatively few 
smells. Our verbal descriptions and analytic comprehension of 
smell, even with only a few odors, in our repertoire, is extremely 
poor. Our response to an odor hardly resembles, in our own 
perception, the actual three-dimensional structure of the mo- 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


157 


lecule responsible for the smell. Olfaction is a complex cogni- 
tive task which we can, within limits, perform — and with 
considerable accuracy — but which we can describe inade- 
quately at best. And if the bloodhound could speak, I think it 
would be at a similar loss to describe the details of what it does 
so supremely well. 

Just as smell is the principal means by which dogs and many 
other animals perceive their surroundings, sight is the primary 
information channel in humans. We are capable of visual 
sensitivity and discrimination at least as impressive as the 
olfactory abilities of the bloodhound. For example, we are able 
to discriminate among faces. Careful observers can distinguish 
among tens or even hundreds of thousands of different faces; 
and the “Identikit,” widely used by Interpol and by police forces 
in the West generally, is capable of reconstructing more than 
ten billion different faces. The survival value of such an ability, 
particularly for our ancestors, is quite clear. Yet consider how 
incapable we are of describing verbally faces that we are per- 
fectly capable of recognizing. Witnesses commonly exhibit a 
total failure in verbal description of an individual previously 
encountered, but high accuracy in recognizing the same in- 
dividual when seen again. And while cases of mistaken identity 
have certainly occurred, courts of law seem willing to admit the 
testimony of any adult witness on questions of facial recogni- 
tion. Consider how easily we can pick, from a vast crowd of 
faces, a “celebrity”; or how in a dense nonordered list our own 
name leaps out at us. 


Human beings and other animals have very sophisticated 
high-data-rate perceptual and cognitive abilities that simply 
bypass the verbal and analytic consciousness that so many of us 
regard as all of us there is. This other kind of knowing, our non- 
verbal perceptions and cognitions, is often described as “intui- 
tive.” The word does not mean “innate.” No one is born with a 
repertoire of faces implanted in his brain. The word conveys, I 


158 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


think, a diffuse annoyance at our inability to understand how 
we come by such knowledge. But intuitive knowledge has an 
extremely long evolutionary history; if we consider the informa- 
tion contained in the genetic material, it goes back to the origin 
of life. The other of our two modes of knowing — the one that in 
the West expresses irritation about the existence of intuitive 
knowledge— is a quite recent evolutionary accretion. Rational 
thinking that is fully verbal ( involving complete sentences, say ) 
is probably only tens or hundreds of thousands of years old. 
There are many people who are, in their conscious lives, almost 
entirely rational, and many who are almost entirely intuitive. 
Each group, with very little appreciation of the reciprocal value 
of these two kinds of cognitive ability, derides the other: 
muddled and amoral are typical adjectives used in the more 
polite of such exchanges. Why should we have two different, 
accurate and complementary modes of thinking which are so 
poorly integrated with each other? 

The first evidence that these two modes of thinking are 
localized in the cerebral cortex has come from the study of brain 
lesions. Accidents or strokes in the temporal or parietal lobes of 
the left hemisphere of the neocortex characteristically result in 
impairment of the ability to read, write, speak and do arith- 
metic. Comparable lesions in the right hemisphere lead to im- 
pairment of three-dimensional vision, pattern recognition, 
musical ability and holistic reasoning. Facial recognition resides 
preferentially in the right hemisphere, and those who “never 
forget a face" are performing pattern recognition on the right 
side. Injuries to the right parietal lobe, in fact, sometimes result 
in the inability of a patient to recognize his own face in a mirror 
or photograph. Such observations strongly suggest that those 
functions we describe as “rational" live mainly in the left 
hemisphere, and those we consider “intuitive,” mainly in the 
right. 

The most significant recent experiments along these lines 
have been performed by Roger Sperry and his collaborators at 
the California Institute of Technology. In an attempt to treat 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 159 


severe cases of grand mal epilepsy, where patients suffer from 
virtually continuous seizures (as frequent as twice an hour, 
forever), they cut the corpus callosum, the main bundle of 
neural fibers connecting the left and right hemispheres of the 
neocortex (see the figure below). The operation was an 
effort to prevent a kind of neuroelectrical storm in one hemi- 

A top view of the human brain, in which the two cerebral hemispheres 
have been separated by neurosurgeons in a successful attempt to control 
epileptic seizures. The separation is accomplished principally by cutting 
the corpus callosum. The more minor connectors of the two hemispheres, 
the anterior commissure and the hippocampal commissure, are also 
sometimes cut. 


Copyright © 1967 by Scientific American 


A schematic representation, after Sperry, of the mapping of the outside 
world onto the two hemispheres of the neocortex. The right and left 
visual fields are projected, respectively, onto the left and right occipital 
lobes. Control of the right and left sides of the body is similarly crossed, 
as is, mainly, hearing. Smells are projected onto the hemispheres on the 
same side as the nostril doing the smelling. 



LOVERS AND MADMEN 


161 


sphere from propagating, far from its focus, into the other. The 
hope was that at least one of the two postoperative hemispheres 
would be unaffected by subsequent seizures. The unexpected 
and welcome result was that the frequency and intensity of the 
seizures declined dramatically in both hemispheres — as if there 
had previously been a positive feedback, with the epileptic 
electrical activity in each hemisphere stimulating the other 
through the corpus callosum. 

Such “split-brain” patients appear, superficially, entirely 
normal after the surgery. Some report a complete cessation of 
the vivid dreams they experienced before the operation. The 
first such patient was unable to speak for a month after the 
operation, but his aphasia later disappeared. The normal be- 
havior and appearance of split-brain patients in itself suggests 
that the function of the corpus callosum is subtle. Here is a 
bundle of two hundred million neural fibers processing some- 
thing like several billion bits per second between the two cere- 
bral hemispheres. It contains about 2 percent of the total num- 
ber of neurons in the neocortex. And yet when it is cut, nothing 
seems to change. I think it is obvious that there must in fact be 
significant changes, but ones that require a deeper scrutiny. 

When we examine an object to our right, both eyes are view- 
ing what is called the right visual field; and to our left, the left 
visual field. But because of the way the optic nerves are con- 
nected, the right visual field is processed in the left hemisphere 
and the left visual field in the right hemisphere. Likewise, 
sounds from the right ear are processed primarily in the left 
hemisphere of the brain and vice versa, although there is some 
audio processing on the same side — for example, sounds from 
the left ear in the left hemisphere. No such crossing of function 
occurs in the more primitive sense of smell, and an odor de- 
tected by the left nostril only is processed exclusively in the left 
hemisphere. But information sent between the brain and the 
limbs is crossed. Objects felt by the left hand are perceived 
primarily in the right hemisphere, and instructions to the right 


162 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


hand to write a sentence are processed in the left hemisphere. 
( See the figure on page 160. ) In 90 percent of human subjects, 
the centers for speech are in the left hemisphere. 

Sperry and his collaborators have performed an elegant 
series of experiments in which separate stimuli are presented 
to the left and right hemispheres of split-brain patients. In a 
typical experiment, the word hatband is flashed on a screen — 
but hat is in the left visual field and band in the right visual 
field. The patient reports that he saw the word band, and it is 
clear that, at least in terms of his ability to communicate 
verbally, he has no idea that the right hemisphere received a 
visual impression of the word hat. When asked what kind of 
band it was, the patient might guess: outlaw band, rubber band, 
jazz band. But when, in comparable experiments, the patient 


The subject reads and verbally reports only the word flashed to his 
right visual field. No association is made, even unconsciously, of the 
words in left and right visual fields. After Sperry. 



LOVERS AND MADMEN 


163 



A split-brain patient presented with a word in his left visual field cor- 
rectly writes (and in script rather than capital letters) the word with 
the hand out of view. But when the subject is asked what his left hand 
wrote, he gives a totally incorrect response (“cup”). After Nebes and 
Sperry. 


is asked to write what he saw, but with his left hand inside a 
box, he scrawls the word hat. He knows from the motion of his 
hand that he has written something, but because he cannot see 
it, there is no way for the information to arrive in the left 
hemisphere which controls verbal ability. Bewilderingly, he 
can write, but cannot utter, the answer. 

Many other experiments exhibit similar results. In one, the 
patient is able to feel three-dimensional plastic letters which are 


164 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


out of view with his left hand. The available letters can spell only 
one correct English word, such as love or cup, which the patient 
is able to work out: the right hemisphere has a weak verbal 
ability, roughly comparable to that in dreams. But after cor- 
rectly spelling the word, the patient is unable to give any 
verbal indication of what word he has spelled. It seems clear 
that in split-brain patients, each hemisphere has scarcely the 
faintest idea what the other hemisphere has learned. 

The geometrical incompetence of the left hemisphere is 
impressive; it is depicted by the illustration on the opposite 
page: A right-handed split-brain patient was able to copy 
simple representations of three-dimensional figures accurately 
only with his ( inexperienced ) left hand. The right hemisphere’s 
superiority at geometry seems restricted to manipulative tasks; 
this dominance does not hold for other sorts of geometrical func- 
tions that do not require hand-eye-brain coordination. These 
manipulative geometrical activities seem to be localized in 
the right hemisphere’s parietal lobe, in a place that, in the left 
hemisphere, is devoted to language. M. S. Gazzaniga of the 
State University of New York at Stony Brook suggests that this 
hemispheric specialization occurs because language is de- 
veloped in the left hemisphere before the child acquires sub- 
stantial competence in manipulative skills and geometrical 
visualization. According to this view, the specialization of the 
right hemisphere for geometrical competence is a specialization 
by default — the left hemisphere’s competence has been re- 
directed toward language. 


Shortly after one of Sperry’s most convincing experiments 
had been completed, he gave a party, so the story goes, to which 
a famous theoretical physicist with an intact corpus callosum 
was invited. The physicist, known for his lively sense of humor, 
sat quietly through the party, listening with interest to Sperry’s 
description of the split-brain findings. The evening passed, the 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


165 


guests trickled away, and Sperry found himself at the door 
bidding goodbye to the last of them. The physicist extended his 
right hand, shook Sperry’s and told him what a fascinating 
evening he had had. Then, with a little two-step, he changed 
the positions of his right and left feet, extended his left hand, 
and said in a strangled, high-pitched voice, “And I want you to 
know I had a terrific time too.” 

When communication between the two cerebral hemispheres 


Relative incompetence of the left hemisphere in copying geometrical 
figures. After Gazzaniga. 


Example Left Hand Right Hand 



i66 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


is impaired, the patient often finds his own behavior inex- 
plicable, and it is clear that even in “good speaking” the speaker 
may not know “the truth of the matter.” (Compare with the 
remark on page 2, from the Phaedrus . ) The relative independ- 
ence of the two hemispheres is apparent in everyday life. We 
have already mentioned the difficulty of describing verbally 
the complex perceptions of the right hemisphere. Many elab- 
orate physical tasks, including athletics, seem to have relatively 
little left-hemisphere involvement. A well-known “ploy” in 
tennis, for example, is to ask your opponent exactly where on 
the racket he places his thumb. It often happens that left- 
hemisphere attention to this question will, at least for a brief 
period, destroy his game. A great deal of musical ability is a 
right-hemisphere function. It is a commonplace that we may 
memorize a song or a piece of music without having the least 
ability to write it down in musical notation. In piano, we might 
describe this by saying that our fingers (but not we) have 
memorized the piece. 

Such memorization can be quite complex. I recently had the 
pleasure of witnessing the rehearsal of a new piano concerto 
by a major symphony orchestra. In such rehearsals the conduc- 
tor does not often start from the beginning and run through to 
the end. Rather, because of the expense of rehearsal time as 
well as the competence of the performers, he concentrates on 
the difficult passages. I was impressed that not only had the 
soloist memorized the entire piece, she was also able to begin 
at any requested place in the composition after only a brief 
glance at the designated measure in the score. This enviable 
skill is a mixed left and right hemisphere function. It is re- 
markably difficult to memorize a piece of music you have never 
heard so that you are able to intervene in any measure. In com- 
puter terminology, the pianist had random access as opposed to 
serial access to the composition. 

This is a good example of the cooperation between left and 
right hemispheres in many of the most difficult and highly 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


167 


valued human activities. It is vital not to overestimate the 
separation of functions on either side of the corpus callosum in 
a normal human being. The existence of so complex a cabling 
system as the corpus callosum must mean, it is important to 
stress again, that interaction of the hemispheres is a vital 
human function. 

In addition to the corpus callosum there is another neural 
cabling between the left and right hemispheres, which is called 
the anterior commissure. It is much smaller than the corpus 
callosum (see figure on p. 159), and exists, as the corpus 
callosum does not, in the brain of the fish. In human split-brain 
experiments in which the corpus callosum is cut, but not the 
anterior commissure, olfactory information is invariably trans- 
ferred between the hemispheres. Occasional transfer of some 
visual and auditory information through the anterior commis- 
sure also seems to occur, but unpredictably from patient to 
patient. These findings are consistent with anatomy and evolu- 
tion; the anterior commissure (and the hippocampal commis- 
sure; see the figure on p. 159) lies deeper than the corpus 
callosum and transfers information in the limbic cortex and per- 
haps in other more ancient components of the brain. 

Humans exhibit an interesting separation of musical and 
verbal skills. Patients with lesions of the right temporal lobe or 
right hemispherectomies are significantly impaired in musical 
but not in verbal ability — in particular in the recognition and 
recall of melodies. But their ability to read music is unimpaired. 
This seems perfectly consistent with the separation of functions 
described : the memorization and appreciation of music involves 
the recognition of auditory patterns and a holistic rather than 
analytic temperament. There is some evidence that poetry is 
partly a right-hemisphere function; in some cases the patient 
begins to write poetry for the first time in his life after a lesion 
in the left hemisphere has left him aphasic. But this would per- 
haps be, in Dryden’s words, “mere poetry.” Also, the right 
hemisphere is apparently unable to rhyme. 


i68 


THE DRACONS OF EDEN 


The separation or lateralization of cortical function was dis- 
covered by experiments on brain-damaged individuals. It is, 
however, important to demonstrate that the conclusions apply 
to normal humans. Experiments carried out by Gazzaniga pre- 
sent brain-undamaged individuals with a word half in the left 
and half in the right visual fields, as in split-brain patients, and 
the reconstruction of the word is monitored. The results indi- 
cate that, in the normal brain, the right hemisphere does very 
little processing of language but instead transmits what it has 
observed across the corpus callosum to the left hemisphere, 
where the entire word is put together. Gazzaniga also found a 
split-brain patient whose right hemisphere was astonishingly 
competent in language skills: but this patient had experienced a 
brain pathology in the temporal-parietal region of the left hem- 
isphere at an early age. We have already mentioned the ability 
of the brain to relocalize functions after injury in the first two 
years of life, but not thereafter. 

Robert Ornstein and David Galin of the Langley Porter 
Neuropsychiatric Institute in San Francisco claim that as 
normal people change from analytic to synthetic intellectual 
activities the EEG activity of the corresponding cerebral 
hemispheres varies in the predicted way: when a subject is 
performing mental arithmetic, for example, the right hemi- 
sphere exhibits the alpha rhythm characteristic of an “idling” 
cerebral hemisphere. If this result is confirmed, it would be 
quite an important finding. 

Ornstein offers an interesting analogy to explain why, in the 
West at least, we have made so much contact with left- 
hemisphere functions and so little with right. He suggests that 
our awareness of right hemisphere function is a little like our 
ability to see stars in the daytime. The sun is so bright that the 
stars are invisible, despite the fact that they are just as present 
in our sky in the daytime as at night. When the sun sets, we 
are able to perceive the stars. In the same way, the brilliance of 
our most recent evolutionary accretion, the verbal abilities of 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


169 


the left hemisphere, obscures our awareness of the functions 
of the intuitive right hemisphere, which in our ancestors must 
have been the principal means of perceiving the world.* 


The left hemisphere processes information sequentially; the 
right hemisphere simultaneously, accessing several inputs at 
once. The left hemisphere works in series; the right in parallel. 
The left hemisphere is something like a digital computer; the 
right like an analog computer. Sperry suggested that the separa- 
tion of function in the two hemispheres is the consequence of a 
“basic incompatibility.” Perhaps we are today able to sense 
directly the operations of the right hemisphere mainly when the 
left hemisphere has “set” — that is, in dreams. 

In the previous chapter, I proposed that a major aspect of 
the dream state might be the unleashing, at night, of R- 
complex processes that had been largely repressed by the neo- 
cortex during the day. But I mentioned that the important 
symbolic content of dreams showed significant neocortical 
involvement, although the frequently reported impairments in 
reading, writing, arithmetic and verbal recall suffered in dreams 
were striking. 

In addition to the symbolic content of dreams, other aspects 
of dream imagery point to a neocortical presence in the dream 
process. For example, I have many times experienced dreams in 

“Marijuana is often described as improving our appreciation of and 
abilities in music, dance, art, pattern and sign recognition and our sensi- 
tivity to nonverbal communication. To the best of my knowledge, it is 
never reported as improving our ability to read and comprehend Ludwig 
Wittgenstein or Immanuel Kant; to calculate the stresses on bridges; or 
to compute Laplace transformations. Often the subject has difficulty even 
in writing down his thoughts coherently. I wonder if, rather than enhanc- 
ing anything, the cannabinols (the active ingredients in marijuana) simply 
suppress the left hemisphere and permit the stars to come out. This may 
also be the objective of the meditative states of many Oriental religions. 


170 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


which the denouement or critical “plot surprise” was possible 
only because of clues — apparently unimportant — inserted 
much earlier into the dream content. The entire plot develop- 
ment of the dream must have been in my mind at the time the 
dream began. (Incidentally, the time taken for dream events 
has been shown by Dement to be approximately equal to the 
time the same events would have taken in real life. ) While the 
content of many dreams seems haphazard, others are remark- 
ably well structured; these dreams have a remarkable resem- 
blance to drama. 

We now recognize the very attractive possibility that the left 
hemisphere of the neocortex is suppressed in the dream state, 
while the right hemisphere — which has an extensive familiarity 
with signs but only a halting verbal literacy — is functioning 
well. It may be that the left hemisphere is not entirely turned 
off at night but instead is performing tasks that make it inacces- 
sible to consciousness: it is busily engaged in data dumping 
from the short-term memory buffer, determining what should 
survive into long-term storage. 

There are occasional but reliably reported instances of diffi- 
cult intellectual problems solved during sleep. Perhaps the most 
famous is the dream of the German chemist Friedrich Kekule 
von Stradonitz. In 1865 the most pressing and puzzling problem 
in organic structural chemistry was the nature of the benzene 
molecule. The structure of several simple organic molecules had 
been deduced from their properties, and all were linear, the 
constituent atoms being attached to each other in a straight 
line. According to his own account, Kekule was dozing on a 
horse-drawn tram when he had a kind of dream of dancing 
atoms in linear arrangements. Abruptly the tail of a chain of 
atoms attached itself to the head and formed a slowly rotating 
ring. On awakening and recalling this dream fragment, Kekule 
realized instantly that the solution to the benzene problem was 
a hexagonal ring of carbon atoms rather than a straight chain. 
Observe, however, that this is quintessentially a pattern- 
recognition exercise and not an analytic activity. It is typical of 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


171 


almost all of the famous creative acts accomplished in the 
dream state : they are right-hemisphere and not left-hemisphere 
activities. 

The American psychoanalyst Erich Fromm has written: 
“Must we not expect that, when deprived of the outside world, 
we regress temporarily to a primitive animal-like unreasonable 
state of mind? Much can be said in favor of such an assump- 
tion, and the view that such a regression is the essential feature 
of the state of sleep, and thus of dream activity, has been held 
by many students of dreaming from Plato to Freud.” Fromm 
goes on to point out that we sometimes achieve in the dream 
state insights that have evaded us when awake. But I believe 
these insights always have an intuitive or pattern-recognition 
character. The “animal-like” aspect of the dream state can be 
understood as the activities of the R-complex and the limbic 
system, and the occasionally blazing intuitive insight as the 
activity of the right hemisphere of the neocortex. Both cases 
occur because in each the repressive functions of the left 
hemisphere are largely turned off. These right-hemisphere in- 
sights Fromm calls “the forgotten language” — and he plausibly 
argues that they are the common origin of dreams, fairy tales 
and myths. 

In dreams we are sometimes aware that a small portion of us 
is placidly watching; often, off in a corner of the dream, there 
is a kind of observer. It is this “watcher” part of our minds that 
occasionally — sometimes in the midst of a nightmare — will 
say to us, “This is only a dream.” It is the “watcher” who appre- 
ciates the dramatic unity of a finely structured dream plot. Most 
of the time, however, the “watcher” is entirely silent. In 
psychedelic drug experiences— for example, with marijuana or 
LSD — the presence of such a “watcher” is commonly reported. 
LSD experiences may be terrifying in the extreme, and several 
people have told me that the difference between sanity and 
insanity in the LSD experience rests entirely on the continued 
presence of the “watcher,” a small, silent portion of the waking 
consciousness. 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


172 


In one marijuana experience, my informant became aware of 
the presence and, in a strange way, the inappropriateness of 
this silent “watcher,” who responds with interest and occasional 
critical comment to the kaleidoscopic dream imagery of the 
marijuana experience but is not part of it. “Who are you?” 
my informant silently asked it. “Who wants to know?” it re- 
plied, making the experience very like a Sufi or Zen parable. 
But my informants question is a deep one. I would suggest the 
observer is a small part of the critical faculties of the left hemi- 
sphere, functioning much more in psychedelic than in dream 
experiences, but present to a degree in both. However, the 
ancient query, “Who is it who asks the question?” is still un- 
answered; perhaps it is another component of the left cerebral 
hemisphere. 

An asymmetry in the temporal lobes in left and right hemi- 
spheres of humans and of chimpanzees has been found, with 
one portion of the left lobe significantly more developed. Hu- 
man infants are born with this asymmetry (which develops as 
early as the twenty-ninth week of gestation), thus suggesting a 
strong genetic predisposition to control speech in the left tem- 
poral lobe. (Nevertheless, children with lesions in the left 
temporal lobe are able, in their first year or two of life, to de- 
velop all speech functions in the comparable portion of the right 
hemisphere with no impairment. At a later age, this replace- 
ment is impossible. ) Also, lateralization is found in the behavior 
of young children. They are better able to understand verbal 
material with the right ear and nonverbal material with the left, 
a regularity also found in adults. Similarly, infants spend more 
time on the average looking at objects on their right than at 
identical objects on their left, and require a louder noise in the 
left ear than in the right to elicit a response. While no clear 
asymmetry of these sorts has yet been found in the brains or 
behavior of apes, Dewson’s results (see page 116) suggest that 
some lateralization may exist in the higher primates; there is 
no evidence for anatomical asymmetries in the temporal lobes 
of, say, rhesus monkeys. One would certainly guess that the 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


173 


linguistic abilities of chimpanzees are governed, as in humans, 
in the left temporal lobe. 

The limited inventory of symbolic cries among nonhuman 
primates seems to be controlled by the limbic system; at least 
the full vocal repertoire of squirrel and rhesus monkeys can be 
evoked by electrical stimulation in the limbic system. Human 
language is controlled in the neocortex. Thus an essential step in 
human evolution must have been the transfer of control of 
vocal language from the limbic system to the temporal lobes of 
the neocortex, a transition from instinctual to learned com- 
munication. However, the surprising ability of apes to ac- 
quire gestural language and the hint of lateralization in the 
chimpanzee brain suggest that the acquisition of voluntary 
symbolic language by primates is not a recent invention. Rather, 
it goes back many millions of years, consistent with the 
evidence from endocranial casts for Broca’s area in Homo 
habilis. 

Lesions in the monkey brain of the neocortical areas respon- 
sible for speech in humans fail to impair their instinctual 
vocalizations. The development of human language must there- 
fore involve an essentially new brain system and not merely a 
reworking of the machinery for limbic cries and calls. Some 
experts in human evolution have suggested that the acquisition 
of language occurred very late — perhaps only in the last few 
tens of thousands of years — and was connected with the chal- 
lenges of the last ice age. But the data do not seem to be con- 
sistent with this view; moreover, the speech centers of the 
human brain are so complex that it is very difficult to imagine 
their evolution in the thousand or so generations since the peak 
of the most recent glaciation. 

The evidence suggests that in our ancestors of some tens of 
millions of years ago there was a neocortex, but one in which 
the left and right hemispheres served comparable and redun- 
dant functions. Since then, upright posture, the use of tools, 
and the development of language have mutually advanced one 
another, a small increment in language ability, for example, 


174 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


permitting the incremental improvement of hand axes, and 
vice versa. The corresponding brain evolution seems to have 
proceeded by specializing one of the two hemispheres for 
analytic thinking. 

The original redundancy, by the way, represents prudent 
computer design. For example, with no knowledge of the 
neuroanatomy of the cerebral cortex, the engineers who de- 
signed the on-board memory of the Viking lander inserted two 
identical computers, which are identically programmed. But 
because of their complexity, differences between the computers 
soon emerged. Before landing on Mars the computers were 
given an intelligence test (by a smarter computer back on 
Earth ) . The dumber brain was then turned off. Perhaps human 
evolution has proceeded in a similar manner and our highly 
prized rational and analytical abilities are localized in the 
other brain — the one that was not fully competent to do 
intuitive thinking. Evolution often uses this strategy. Indeed, 
the standard evolutionary practice of increasing the amount of 
genetic information as organisms increase in complexity is 
accomplished by doubling part of the genetic material and then 
allowing the slow specialization of function of the redundant set. 


Almost without exception all human languages have built 
into them a polarity, a veer to the right. “Right” is associated 
with legality, correct behavior, high moral principles, firmness, 
and masculinity; “left,” with weakness, cowardice, diffuseness 
of purpose, evil, and femininity. In English, for example, we 
have “rectitude,” “rectify,” “righteous,” “right-hand man,” 
“dexterity,” “adroit” (from the French “a droite ”), “rights,” as 
in “the rights of man,” and the phrase “in his right mind.” Even 
“ambidextrous” means, ultimately, two right hands. 

On the other side (literally), we have “sinister” (almost 
exactly the Latin word for left”), “gauche” (precisely the 
French word for “left”), “gawky,” “gawk,” and “left-handed 
compliment.” The Russian “nalevo” for “left” also means “sur- 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


175 


reptitious.” The Italian “mancino” for “left” signifies “deceitful.” 
There is no “Bill of Lefts.” 

In one etymology, “left” comes from “lyft,” the Anglo-Saxon 
for weak or worthless. “Right” in the legal sense (as an action 
in accord with the rules of society) and “right” in the logical 
sense ( as the opposite of erroneous ) are also commonplaces in 
many languages. The political use of right and left seems to 
date from the moment when a significant lay political force 
arose as counterpoise to the nobility. The nobles were placed 
on the king’s right and the radical upstarts — the capitalists — 
on his left. The nobles were to the royal right, of course, because 
the king himself was a noble; and his right side was the favored 
position. And in theology as in politics: “At the right hand of 
God.” 

Many examples of a connection between “right” and 
“straight” can be found.* In Mexican Spanish you indicate 
straight (ahead) by saying “right right”; in Black American 
English, “right on” is an expression of approval, often for a 
sentiment eloquently or deftly phrased. “Straight” meaning 
conventional, correct or proper is a commonplace in colloquial 
English today. In Russian, right is “prava,” a cognate of 
“pravda,” which means “true.” And in many languages “true” 
has the additional meaning of “straight” or “accurate,” as in “his 
aim was true.” 

The Stanford-Binet IQ test makes some effort to examine 
both left- and right-hemisphere function. For right-hemisphere 
function there are tests in which the subject is asked to predict 
the opened configuration of a piece of paper after it is folded 
several times and a small piece cut out with a pair of scissors; or 
to estimate the total number of blocks in a stack when some 
blocks are hidden from view. Although the devisers of the 

*1 wonder if there is any significance to the fact that Latin, Germanic 
and Slavic languages, for example, are written left to right, and Semitic 
languages, right to left. The ancient Greeks wrote in boustrophedon (“as 
the ox plows”) : left to right on one line, right to left on the next. 


176 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


Stanford-Binet test consider such questions of geometric con- 
ception to be very useful in determining the “intelligence” of 
children, they are said to be increasingly less useful in IQ tests 
of teenagers and adults. There is certainly little room on such 
examinations for testing intuitive leaps. Unsurprisingly, IQ 
tests also seem to be powerfully biased toward the left hemi- 
sphere. 

The vehemence of the prejudices in favor of the left hemi- 
sphere and the right hand reminds me of a war in which the 
side that barely won renames the contending parties and issues, 
so that future generations will have no difficulty in deciding 
where prudent loyalty should lie. When Lenin’s party was a 
fairly small splinter group in Russian socialism he named it the 
Bolshevik party, which in Russian means the majority party. 
The opposition obligingly, and with awesome stupidity, ac- 
cepted the designation of Mensheviks, the minority party. In 
a decade and a half they were. Similarly, in the worldwide 
associations of the words “right” and “left” there is evidence of 
a rancorous conflict early in the history of mankind . 0 What 
could arouse such powerful emotions? 

In combat with weapons which cut or stab — and in such 
sports as boxing, baseball and tennis — a participant trained in 
the use of the right hand will find himself at a disadvantage 
when confronted unexpectedly with a left-hander. Also, a 
malevolent left-handed swordsman might be able to come 
quite close to his adversary with his unencumbered right hand 
appearing as a gesture of disarmament and peace. But these 

“A quite different set of circumstances is revealed by another pair of 
verbal polar opposites: black and white. Despite English phrases of the 
sort as different as black and white,” the two words appear to have the 
same origin. Black comes from the Anglo-Saxon “blaece,” and white 
from the Anglo-Saxon blac, ’ which is still active in its cognates “blanch,” 
blank, bleak, and the French “blanc.” Both black and white have 
as their distinguishing properties the absence of color, and employing the 
same word for both strikes me as very perceptive of King Arthur’s 
lexicographer. 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


1 77 


circumstances do not seem to be able to explain the breadth 
and depth of antipathy to the left hand, nor the extension of 
right chauvinism to women — traditional noncombatants. 

One, perhaps remote, possibility is connected with the un- 
availability of toilet paper in preindustrial societies. For most of 
human history, and in many parts of the world today, the empty 
hand is used for personal hygiene after defecation, a fact of life 
in pre technological cultures. It does not follow that those who 
follow this custom enjoy it. Not only is it aesthetically unappeal- 
ing, it involves a serious risk of transfering disease to others as 
well as to oneself. The simplest precaution is to greet and to eat 
with the other hand. Without apparent exception in pre- 
technological human societies, it is the left hand that is used for 
such toilet functions and the right for greeting and eating. 
Occasional lapses from this convention are quite properly 
viewed with horror. Severe penalties have been visited on small 
children for breaches of the prevailing handedness conventions; 
and many older people in the West can still remember a time 
when there were firm strictures against even reaching for ob- 
jects with the left hand. I believe this account can explain the 
virulence against associations with “left” and the defensive self- 
congratulatory bombast attached to associations with “right” 
which are commonplace in our right-handed society. The ex- 
planation does not, however, explain why the right and left 
hands were originally chosen for these particular functions. It 
might be argued that statistically there is one chance in two that 
toilet functions would be relegated to the left hand. But we 
would then expect one society in two to be righteous about left- 
ness. In fact, there seem to be no such societies. In a society 
where most people are right-handed, precision tasks such as 
eating and fighting would be relegated to the favored hand, 
leaving by default toilet functions to the side sinister. However, 
this also does not account for why the society is right-handed. 
In its most fundamental sense, the explanation must lie else- 
where. 

There is no direct connection between the hand you prefer 



LOVERS AND MADMEN 179 


to use for most tasks and the cerebral hemisphere that controls 
speech, and the majority of left-handers may still have speech 
centers in the left hemisphere, although this point is in dispute. 
Nevertheless, the existence of handedness itself is thought to 
be connected with brain lateralization. Some evidence suggests 
that left-handers are more likely to have problems with such 
left-hemisphere functions as reading, writing, speaking and 
arithmetic; and to be more adept at such right-hemisphere 
functions as imagination, pattern recognition and general 
creativity.* Some data suggest that human beings are genet- 
ically biased towards right-handedness. For example, the num- 
ber of ridges on fingerprints of fetuses during the third and 
fourth months of gestation is larger in the right hand than the 
left hand, and this preponderance persists throughout fetal 
life and after birth. 

Information on the handedness of the Australopithecines has 
been obtained from an analysis of fossil baboon skulls fractured 
with bone or wooden clubs by these early relatives of man. The 
discoverer of the Australopithecine fossils, Raymond Dart, con- 
cluded that about 20 percent of them were left-handed, which 
is roughly the fraction in modern man. In contrast, while other 
animals often show strong paw preferences, the favored paw is 
almost as likely to be left as right. 

The left/ right distinctions run deep into the past of our 
species. I wonder if some slight whiff of the battle between the 
rational and the intuitive, between the two hemispheres of the 
brain, has not surfaced in the polarity between words for right 

"The only left-handed American presidents have apparently been 
Harry Truman and Gerald Ford. I am not sure whether this is consistent 
or inconsistent with the proposed (weak) correlation between handed- 
ness and hemisphere function. Leonardo da Vinci may be the most illumi- 
nating example of the creative genius of left-handers. 


Two robust Australopithecines. These animals may have been predomi- 
nantly right-handed; the gracile Australopithecines very likely were. 

Copyright © 1965 * 1973 Time, Inc. 


i8o 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


and left: it is the verbal hemisphere that controls the right 
side. There may not in fact be more dexterity in the right side; 
but it certainly has a better press. The left hemisphere seems to 
feel quite defensive — in a strange way insecure — about the 
right hemisphere; and, if this is so, verbal criticism of intuitive 
thinking becomes suspect on the ground of motive. Unfortu- 
nately, there is every reason to think that the right hemisphere 
has comparable misgivings — expressed nonverbally, of course 
— about the left. 


Admitting the validity of both methods of thinking, left 
hemisphere and right hemisphere, we must ask if they are 
equally effective and useful in new circumstances. There is no 
doubt that right-hemisphere intuitive thinking may perceive 
patterns and connections too difficult for the left hemisphere; 
but it may also detect patterns where none exist. Skeptical and 
critical thinking is not a hallmark of the right hemisphere. And 
unalloyed right-hemisphere doctrines, particularly when they 
are invented during new and trying circumstances, may be 
erroneous or paranoid. 

Recent experiments by Stuart Dimond, a psychologist at Uni- 
versity College, Cardiff in Wales, have employed special con- 
tact lenses to show films to the right or left hemisphere only. 
Of course, the information arriving in one hemisphere in a 
normal subject can be transmitted via the corpus callosum to 
the other hemisphere. Subjects were asked to rate a variety of 
films in terms of emotional content. These experiments showed 
a remarkable tendency for the right hemisphere to view the 
world as more unpleasant, hostile, and even disgusting than the 
left hemisphere. The Cardiff psychologists also found that when 
both hemispheres are working, our emotional responses are 
very similar to those of the left hemisphere only. The negativ- 
ism of the right hemisphere is apparently strongly tempered in 
everyday life by the more easygoing left hemisphere. But a dark 
and suspicious emotion tone seems to lurk in the right hemi- 
sphere, which may explain some of the antipathy felt by our 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


181 


left hemisphere selves to the “sinister” quality of the left hand 
and the right hemisphere. 

In paranoid thinking a person believes he has detected a 
conspiracy — that is, a hidden ( and malevolent ) pattern in the 
behavior of friends, associates or governments — where in fact 
no such pattern exists. If there is such a conspiracy, the subject 
may be profoundly anxious, but his thinking is not necessarily 
paranoid. A famous case involves James Forrestal, the first U.S. 
Secretary of Defense. At the end of World War II, Forrestal was 
convinced that Israeli secret agents were following him every- 
where. His physicians, equally convinced of the absurdity of 
this idee fixe, diagnosed him as paranoid and confined him to 
an upper story of Walter Reed Army Hospital, from which he 
plunged to his death, partly because of inadequate supervision 
by hospital personnel, overly deferential to one of his exalted 
rank. Later it was discovered that Forrestal was indeed being 
followed by Israeli agents who were worried that he might 
reach a secret understanding with representatives of Arab na- 
tions. Forrestal had other problems, but having his valid per- 
ception labeled paranoid did not help his condition. 

In times of rapid social change there are bound to be con- 
spiracies, both by those in favor of change and by those defend- 
ing the status quo, the latter more than the former in recent 
American political history. Detecting conspiracies when there 
are no conspiracies is a symptom of paranoia; detecting them 
when they exist is a sign of mental health. An acquaintance of 
mine says, “In America today, if you’re not a little paranoid 
you’re out of your mind.” The remark, however, has global 
applicability. 

There is no way to tell whether the patterns extracted by the 
right hemisphere are real or imagined without subjecting them 
to left-hemisphere scrutiny. On the other hand, mere critical 
thinking, without creative and intuitive insights, without the 
search for new patterns, is sterile and doomed. To solve complex 
problems in changing circumstances requires the activity of 
both cerebral hemispheres: the path to the future lies through 
the corpus callosum. 


i8z 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


An example of different behavior arising from different cogni- 
tive functions — one example of many — is the familiar human 
reaction to the sight of blood. Many of us feel queasy or dis- 
gusted or even faint at the sight of copious bleeding in some- 
one else. The reason, I think, is clear. We have over the years 
associated our own bleeding with pain, injury, and a violation 
of bodily integrity; and we experience a sympathetic or vicar- 
ious agony in seeing someone else bleed. We recognize their 
pain. This is almost certainly the reason that the color red is 
used to signify danger or stop* in many diverse human societies. 
(If the oxygen-carrying pigment in our blood were green — 
which biochemically it could have been — we would, all of us, 
think green a quite natural index of danger and be amused at 
the idea of using red. ) A trained physician, on the other hand, 
has a different set of perceptions when faced with blood. What 
organ is injured? How copious is the bleeding? Is it venous or 
arterial flow? Should a tourniquet be applied? These are all 
analytic functions of the left hemisphere. They require more 
complex and analytic cognitive processes than the simple asso- 
ciation: blood equals pain. And they are far more practical. If I 
were injured, I would much rather be with a competent physi- 
cian who through long experience has become almost entirely 
inured to gore than with an utterly sympathetic friend who 
faints dead away at the sight of blood. The latter may be highly 
motivated not to wound another person, but the former will be 
able to help if such a wound occurs. In an ideally structured 
species, these two quite different attitudes would be present 
simultaneously in the same individual. And in most of us that is 
just what has happened. The two modes of thinking are of very 
different complexity, but they have complementary survival 
value. 

A typical example of the occasional resistance mustered by 
intuitive thinking against the clear conclusions of analytical 
thinking is D. H. Lawrence’s opinion of the nature of the moon: 

“Or down, as in elevator direction lights. Our arboreal ancestors had to 
be very careful about down. 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


183 


“It’s no use telling me it’s a dead rock in the sky! I know it’s 
not.” Indeed, the moon is more than a dead rock in the sky. It 
is beautiful, it has romantic associations, it raises tides, it may 
even be the ultimate reason for the timing of the human men- 
strual cycle. But certainly one of its attributes is that it is a dead 
rock in the sky. Intuitive thinking does quite well in areas 
where we have had previous personal or evolutionary experi- 
ence. But in new areas — such as the nature of celestial objects 
close up — intuitive reasoning must be diffident in its claims and 
willing to accommodate to the insights that rational thinking 
wrests from Nature. By the same token, the processes of rational 
thought are not ends in themselves but must be perceived in the 
larger context of human good; the nature and direction of 
rational and analytical endeavors should be determined in sig- 
nificant part by their ultimate human implications, as revealed 
through intuitive thinking. 

In a way, science might be described as paranoid thinking 
applied to Nature: we are looking for natural conspiracies, for 
connections among apparently disparate data. Our objective is 
to abstract patterns from Nature (right-hemisphere thinking), 
but many proposed patterns do not in fact correspond to the 
data. Thus all proposed patterns must be subjected to the sieve 
of critical analysis (left-hemisphere thinking). The search for 
patterns without critical analysis, and rigid skepticism without 
a search for patterns, are the antipodes of incomplete science. 
The effective pursuit of knowledge requires both functions. 

Calculus, Newtonian physics and geometrical optics were all 
derived by fundamentally geometrical arguments and are 
today taught and demonstrated largely by analytical argu- 
ments: creating the mathematics and physics is more of a 
right-hemisphere function than teaching it. This is common 
today as well. Major scientific insights are characteristically 
intuitive, and equally characteristically described in scientific 
papers by linear analytical arguments. There is no anomaly in 
this: it is, rather, just as it should be. The creative act has major 
right-hemisphere components. But arguments on the validity 
of the result are largely left-hemisphere functions. 


184 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


It was an astonishing insight by Albert Einstein, central to 
the theory of general relativity, that gravitation could be under- 
stood by setting the contracted Riemann-Christoffel tensor 
equal to zero. But this contention was accepted only because 
one could work out the detailed mathematical consequences of 
the equation, see where it made predictions different from those 
of Newtonian gravitation, and then turn to experiment to see 
which way Nature votes. In three remarkable experiments — 
the deflection of starlight when passing near the sun; the mo- 
tion of the orbit of Mercury, the planet nearest to the sun; and 
the red shift of spectral lines in a strong stellar gravita- 
tional field — Nature voted for Einstein. But without these ex- 
perimental tests, very few physicists would have accepted 
general relativity. There are many hypotheses in physics of 
almost comparable brilliance and elegance that have been re- 
jected because they did not survive such a confrontation with 
experiment. In my view, the human condition would be greatly 
improved if such confrontations and willingness to reject hypo- 
theses were a regular part of our social, political, economic, 
religious and cultural lives. 

I know of no significant advance in science that did not 
require major inputs from both cerebral hemispheres. This is 
not true for art, where apparently there are no experiments by 
which capable, dedicated and unbiased observers can deter- 
mine to their mutual satisfaction which works are great. As one 
of hundreds of examples, I might note that the principal French 
art critics, journals and museums of the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries rejected French Impressionism in 
toto-, today the same artists are widely held by the same institu- 
tions to have produced masterpieces. Perhaps a century hence 
the pendulum will reverse direction again. 

This book itself is an exercise in pattern recognition, an 
attempt to understand something of the nature and evolution 
of human intelligence, using clues from a wide variety of sci- 
ences and myths. It is in significant part a right-hemisphere 
activity; and in the course of writing it I was repeatedly 


LOVERS AND MADMEN 


185 


awakened in the middle of the night or in the early hours of 
the morning by the mild exhilaration of a new insight. But 
whether the insights are genuine — and I expect many of them 
will require substantial revision — depends on how well my left 
hemisphere has functioned (and also on whether I have re- 
tained certain views because I am unaware of the evidence that 
contradicts them ) . In writing this book I have been repeatedly 
struck by its existence as a meta-example: in conception and 
execution it illustrates its own content. 

In the seventeenth century there were two quite distinct 
ways of describing the connection between mathematical 
quantities : you could write an algebraic equation or you could 
draw a curve. Rene Descartes showed the formal identity of 
these two views of the mathematical world when he invented 
analytical geometry, through which algebraic equations can be 
graphed. (Descartes, incidentally, was also an anatomist con- 
cerned about the localization of function in the brain. ) 
Analytical geometry is now a tenth-grade commonplace, but it 
was a brilliant discovery for the seventeenth century. However, 
an algebraic equation is an archetypical left-hemisphere con- 
struction, while a regular geometrical curve, the pattern in an 
array of related points, is a characteristic right-hemisphere 
production. In a certain sense, analytical geometry is the corpus 
callosum of mathematics. Today a range of doctrines find 
themselves either in conflict or without mutual interaction. In 
some important instances, they are left-hemisphere versus right- 
hemisphere views. The Cartesian connection of apparently un- 
related or antithetical doctrines is sorely needed once again. 

I think the most significant creative activities of our or any 
other human culture — legal and ethical systems, art and music, 
science and technology — were made possible only through the 
collaborative work of the left and right cerebral hemispheres. 
These creative acts, even if engaged in rarely or only by a few, 
have changed us and the world. We might say that human cul- 
ture is the function of the corpus callosum. 











It is the business of the future to be dangerous. . . . 
The major advances in civilization are processes that 
all but wreck the societies in which they occur. 

Alfred North Whitehead 
Adventures in Ideas 


The voice of the intellect is a soft one, but it does not 
rest until it has gained a hearing. Ultimately, after 
endless rebuffs, it succeeds. This is one of the few 
points in which one may be optimistic about the 
future of mankind. 

Sigmund Freud 
The Future of an Illusion 


The mind of man is capable of anything — because 
everything is in it, all the past as well as all the 
future. 

Joseph Conrad 
Heart of Darkness 



he human brain seems to be in a state of uneasy 
truce, with occasional skirmishes and rare battles. 
The existence of brain components with predisposi- 
tions to certain behavior is not an invitation to 


fatalism or despair: we have substantial control over the relative 


importance of each component. Anatomy is not destiny, but it 
is not irrelevant either. At least some mental illness can be 


understood in terms of a conflict among the contending neural 


parties. The mutual repression among the components goes in 
many directions. We have discussed limbic and neocortical 
repression of the R-complex, but through society, there may 
also be R-complex repression of the neocortex, and repression 
of one cerebral hemisphere by the other. 

In general, human societies are not innovative. They are 
hierarchical and ritualistic. Suggestions for change are greeted 
with suspicion: they imply an unpleasant future variation in 
ritual and hierarchy: an exchange of one set of rituals for 
another, or perhaps for a less structured society with fewer 
rituals. And yet there are times when societies must change. 
“The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate for the stormy 
present” was Abraham Lincoln’s description of this truth. Much 
of the difficulty in attempting to restructure American and other 
societies arises from this resistance by groups with vested in- 
terests in the status quo. Significant change might require those 
who are now high in the hierarchy to move downward many 
steps. This seems to them undesirable and is resisted. 

But some change, in fact some significant change, is apparent 
in Western society — certainly not enough, but more than in 
almost any other society. Older and more static cultures are 





THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 1Q1 


much more resistant to change. In Colin Turnbull’s book The 
Forest People, there is a poignant description of a crippled 
Pygmy girl who was provided by visiting anthropologists with 
a stunning technological innovation, the crutch. Despite the 
fact that it greatly eased the suffering of the little girl, the 
adults, including her parents, showed no particular interest in 
this invention . 8 There are many other cases of intolerance 
to novelty in traditional societies; and diverse pertinent examples 
could be drawn from the lives of such men as Leonardo, Galileo, 
Desiderius Erasmus, Charles Darwin, or Sigmund Freud. 

The traditionalism of societies in a static state is generally 
adaptive: the cultural forms have been evolved painfully over 
many generations and are known to serve well. Like mutations, 
any random change is apt to serve less well. But also like muta- 
tions, changes are necessary if adaptation to new environmental 
circumstances is to be achieved. The tension between these two 
tendencies marks much of the political conflict of our age. At a 
time characterized by a rapidly varying external physical and 
social environment — such as our time — accommodation to and 
acceptance of change is adaptive; in societies that inhabit static 
environments, it is not. The hunter/ gatherer lifestyles have 
served mankind well for most of our history, and I think there 
is unmistakable evidence that we are in a way designed by 

“In defense of the Pygmies, perhaps I should note that a friend of 
mine who has spent time with them says that for such activities as the 
patient stalking and hunting of mammals and fish they prepare themselves 
through marijuana intoxication, which helps to make the long waits, 
boring to anyone further evolved than a Komodo dragon, at least mod- 
erately tolerable. Ganja is, he says, their only cultivated crop. It would 
be wryly interesting if in human history the cultivation of marijuana led 
generally to the invention of agriculture, and thereby to civilization. (The 
marijuana-intoxicated Pygmy, poised patiently for an hour with his 
fishing spear aloft, is earnestly burlesqued by the beer-sodden rifle- 
men, protectively camouflaged in red plaid, who, stumbling through the 
nearby woods, terrorize American suburbs each Thanksgiving.) 


Man ponders himself. By Vesalius, the founder of modern anatomy. 

Courtesy— Library, The New York Academy of Medicine 


192 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


evolution for such a culture; when we abandon the hunter/ 
gatherer life we abandon the childhood of our species. 
Hunter/ gatherer and high technology cultures are both prod- 
ucts of the neocortex. We are now irreversibly set upon the 
latter path. But it will take some getting used to. 

Britain has produced a range of remarkably gifted multidis- 
ciplinary scientists and scholars who are sometimes described as 
polymaths. The group included, in recent times, Bertrand 
Russell, A. N. Whitehead, J. B. S. Haldane, J. D. Bernal, and 
Jacob Bronowski. Russell commented that the development of 
such gifted individuals required a childhood period in which 
there was little or no pressure for conformity, a time in which 
the child could develop and pursue his or her own interests no 
matter how unusual or bizarre. Because of the strong pressures 
for social conformity both by the government and by peer 
groups in the United States — and even more so in the Soviet 
Union, Japan and the People’s Republic of China — I think that 
such countries are producing proportionately fewer polymaths. 
I also think there is evidence that Britain is in a steep current 
decline in this respect. 

Particularly today, when so many difficult and complex prob- 
lems face the human species, the development of broad and 
powerful thinking is desperately needed. There should be a 
way, consistent with the democratic ideals espoused by all of 
these countries, to encourage, in a humane and caring context, 
the intellectual development of especially promising youngsters. 
Instead we find, in the instructional and examination systems 
of most of these countries, an almost reptilian ritualization of 
the educational process. I sometimes wonder whether the 
appeal of sex and aggression in contemporary American televi- 
sion and film offerings reflects the fact that the R-complex is 
well developed in all of us, while many neocortical functions 
are, partly because of the repressive nature of schools and 
societies, more rarely expressed, less familiar and insufficiently 
treasured. 

As a consequence of the enormous social and technological 
changes of the last few centuries, the world is not working well. 



Photo by Nat Farbman, Life. Courtesy of Time-Life Picture Agency, © Time Inc. 


A hunter/ gatherer simultaneously stalking prey and educating the 
young. This life style, which has been characteristic of our species for 
millions of years, is now almost extinct. 

We do not live in traditional and static societies. But our gov- 
ernments, in resisting change, act as if we did. Unless we 
destroy ourselves utterly, the future belongs to those societies 
that, while not ignoring the reptilian and mammalian parts of 
our being, enable the characteristically human components of 
our nature to flourish; to those societies that encourage diversity 
rather than conformity; to those societies willing to invest 
resources in a variety of social, political, economic and cultural 
experiments, and prepared to sacrifice short-term advantage for 
long-term benefit; to those societies that treat new ideas as 
delicate, fragile and immensely valuable pathways to the future. 


194 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


A better understanding of the brain may also one day bear 
on such vexing social issues as the definition of death and the 
acceptability of abortions. The current ethos in the West seems 
to be that it is permissible in a good cause to kill nonhuman 
primates and certainly other mammals; but it is impermissible 
(for individuals) to kill human beings under similar circum- 
stances. The logical implication is that it is the characteristically 
human qualities of the human brain that make the difference. 
In the same way, if substantial parts of the neocortex are func- 
tioning, the comatose patient can certainly be said to be alive 
in a human sense, even if there is major impairment of other 
physical and neurological functions. On the other hand, a 
patient otherwise alive but exhibiting no sign of neocortical 
activity (including the neocortical activities in sleep) might, 
in a human sense, be described as dead. In many such cases the 
neocortex has failed irreversibly but the limbic system, R- 
complex, and lower brainstem are still operative, and such 
fundamental functions as respiration and blood circulation are 
unimpaired. I think more work is required on human brain 
physiology before a well-supported legal definition of death can 
be generally accepted, but the road to such a definition will 
very likely take us through considerations of the neocortex as 
opposed to the other components of the brain. 

Similar ideas could help to resolve the great abortion debate 
flourishing in America in the late 1970s — a controversy marked 
on both sides by extreme vehemence and a denial of any merit 
to opposing points of view. At one extreme is the position that 
a woman has an innate right of “control of her own body,” 
which encompasses, it is said, arranging for the death of a fetus 
on a variety of grounds including psychological disinclination 
and economic inability to raise a child. At the other extreme is 
the existence of a “right to life,” the assertion that the killing of 
even a zygote, a fertilized egg before the first embryonic divi- 
sion, is murder because the zygote has the “potential” to become 
a human being. I realize that in an issue so emotionally charged 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


195 


any proposed solution is unlikely to receive plaudits from the 
partisans of either extreme, and sometimes our hearts and our 
heads lead us to different conclusions. However, based on some 
of the ideas in previous chapters of this book, I would like to 
offer at least an attempt at a reasonable compromise. 

There is no question that legalized abortions avoid the 
tragedy and butchery of illegal and incompetent “back-alley” 
abortions, and that in a civilization whose very continuance is 
threatened by the specter of uncontrolled population growth, 
widely available medical abortions can serve an important social 
need. But infanticide would solve both problems and has been 
employed widely by many human communities, including seg- 
ments of the classical Greek civilization, which is so generally 
considered the cultural antecedent of our own. And it is widely 
practiced today: there are many parts of the world where one 
out of every four newborn babies does not survive the first year 
of life. Yet by our laws and mores, infanticide is murder beyond 
any question. Since a baby born prematurely in the seventh 
month of pregnancy is in no significant respect different from a 
fetus in utero in the seventh month, it must, it seems to me, 
follow that abortion, at least in the last trimester, is very close to 
murder. Objections that the fetus in the third trimester is still 
not breathing seem specious: Is it permissible to commit in- 
fanticide after birth if the umbilicus has not yet been severed, 
or if the baby has not yet taken its first breath? Likewise, if I am 
psychologically unprepared to live with a stranger — in army 
boot camp or college dormitory, for example — I do not 
thereby have a right to kill him, and my annoyance at some of 
the uses of my tax money does not extend to exterminating the 
recipients of those taxes. The civil liberties point of view is 
often muddled in such debates. Why, it is sometimes asked, 
should the beliefs of others on this issue have to extend to me? 
But those who do not personally support the conventional 
prohibition against murder are nevertheless required by our 
society to abide by the criminal code. 

On the opposite side of the discussion, the phrase “right to 


ig6 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


life” is an excellent example of a “buzz word,” designed to 
inflame rather than illuminate. There is no right to life in any 
society on Earth today, nor has there been at any former time 
(with a few rare exceptions, such as among the Jains of India). 
We raise farm animals for slaughter; destroy forests; pollute 
rivers and lakes until no fish can live there; hunt deer and elk for 
sport, leopards for their pelts, and whales for dog food; en- 
twine dolphins, gasping and writhing, in great tuna nets; and 
club seal pups to death for “population management.” All these 
beasts and vegetables are as alive as we. What is protected in 
many human societies is not life, but human life. And even with 
this protection, we wage “modern” wars on civilian populations 
with a toll so terrible we are, most of us, afraid to consider it 
very deeply. Often such mass murders are justified by racial 
or nationalistic redefinitions of our opponents as less than 
human. 

In the same way, the argument about the “potential” to be 
human seems to me particularly weak. Any human egg or sperm 
under appropriate circumstances has the potential to become a 
human being. Yet male masturbation and noctural emissions are 
generally considered natural acts and not cause for murder 
indictments. In a single ejaculation there are enough sperma- 
tozoa for the generation of hundreds of millions of human 
beings. In addition, it is possible that in the not-too-distant 
future we may be able to clone a whole human being from a 
single cell taken from essentially anywhere in the donor’s body. 
If so, any cell in my body has the potential to become a human 
being if properly preserved until the time of a practical cloning 
technology. Am I committing mass murder if I prick my finger 
and lose a drop of blood? 

The issues are clearly complex. The solution, equally clearly, 
must involve a compromise among a number of cherished but 
conflicting values. The key practical question is to determine 
when a fetus becomes human. This in turn rests on what we 
mean by human. Surely not having a human shape, because an 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


197 


artifact of organic materials that resembled a human being but 
was constructed for the purpose would certainly not be con- 
sidered human. Likewise, an extraterrestrial intelligent being 
who did not resemble human beings but who had ethical, 
intellectual and artistic accomplishments exceeding our own 
should certainly fall within our prohibitions against murder. It 
is not what we look like that specifies our humanity, but what 
we are. The reason we prohibit the killing of human beings must 
be because of some quality human beings possess, a quality we 
especially prize, that few or no other organisms on Earth enjoy. 
It cannot be the ability to feel pain or deep emotions, because 
that surely extends to many of the animals we gratuitously 
slaughter. 

This essential human quality, I believe, can only be our 
intelligence. If so, the particular sanctity of human life can be 
identified with the development and functioning of the neo- 
cortex. We cannot require its full development, because that 
does not occur until many years after birth. But perhaps we 
might set the transition to humanity at the time when neo- 
cortical activity begins, as determined by electroencephalog- 
raphy of the fetus. Some insights on when the brain develops 
a distinctly human character emerge from the simplest em- 
bryological observations (see the figure on page 198). Very 
little work has been done in this field to date, and it seems to 
me that such investigations could play a major role in achieving 
an acceptable compromise in the abortion debate. Undoubtedly 
there would be a variation from fetus to fetus as to the time of 
initiation on the first neocortical EEG signals, and a legal 
definition of the beginning of characteristically human life 
should be biased conservatively — that is, toward the youngest 
fetus that exhibits such activity. Perhaps the transition would 
fall toward the end of the first trimester or near the beginning 
of the second trimester of pregnancy. (Here we are talking 
about what, in a rational society, should be prohibited by law: 
anyone who feels that abortion of a younger fetus might be 


ig8 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 



Embryonic development of the human brain. Shown are A after three 
weeks of gestation; B after seven weeks; C after four months; and 
D in a newborn infant. The brains in A and B have strong resemblances 
to the brains of fish and amphibians. 


murder should be under no legal obligation to perform or 
accept such an abortion.) 

But a consistent application of these ideas must avoid human 
chauvinism. If there are other organisms that share the intel- 
ligence of a somewhat backward but fully developed human 
being, they at least should be offered the same protection 
against murder that we are willing to extend to human beings 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


199 


late in their uterine existence. Since the evidence for intelligence 
in dolphins, whales and apes is now at least moderately com- 
pelling, any consistent moral posture on abortion should, I 
would think, include firm strictures against at least the gratui- 
tous slaughter of these animals. But the ultimate key to the 
solution of the abortion debate would seem to be the investiga- 
tion of prepartum neocortical activity. 


And what of the future evolution of the human brain? There 
is a wide and growing body of evidence that many forms of 
mental illness are the result of chemical or wiring malfunctions 
in the brain. Since many mental diseases have the same symp- 
toms, they may arise from the same malfunctions and should be 
accessible to the same cures. 

The pioneering nineteenth-century British neurologist Hugh- 
lings Jackson remarked, “Find out about dreams and you will 
find out about insanity.” Severely dream deprived subjects often 
begin hallucinating in daytime. Schizophrenia is often accom- 
panied by nighttime sleep impairment, but whether as a cause 
or an effect is uncertain. One of the most striking aspects of 
schizophrenia is how unhappy and despairing its sufferers gen- 
erally are. Might schizophrenia be what happens when the 
dragons are no longer safely chained at night; when they break 
the left-hemisphere shackles and burst forth in daylight? Other 
diseases perhaps result from an impairment of right-hemisphere 
function: Obsessive-compulsives, for example, are very rarely 
found to make intuitive leaps. 

In the middle 1960s Lester Grinspoon and his colleagues at 
Harvard Medical School performed a set of controlled experi- 
ments on the relative value of various therapeutic techniques 
for treating schizophrenia. They are psychiatrists, and if they 
had any bias it was toward the use of verbal rather than phar- 
macological techniques. But they found to their surprise that 
the recently developed tranquilizer, thioridazine (one of a 
group of approximately equally effective antipsychotic drugs 


200 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


known as phenothiazines ) , was far more effective in controlling 
if not curing the disease; in fact, they found that thioridazine 
alone was at least as effective — in the judgment of the patients, 
their relatives, and the psychiatrists — as thioridazine plus 
psychotherapy. The integrity of the experimenters in the face 
of this unexpected finding is breathtaking. (It is difficult to 
imagine any experiment that would convince leading practi- 
tioners of many political or religious philosophies of the 
superiority of a competing doctrine. ) 

Recent research shows that endorphins, small protein mole- 
cules which occur naturally in the brains of rats and other 
mammals, can induce in these animals marked muscular rigid- 
ity and stupor reminiscent of schizophrenic catatonia. The 
molecular or neurological cause of schizophrenia — which was 
once responsible for one out of ten hospital-bed occupancies 
in the United States — is still unknown; but it is not implausible 
that someday we will discover precisely what locale or set of 
neurochemicals in the brain determines this malfunction. 

A curious question in medical ethics emerges from the ex- 
periments of Grinspoon et al. The tranquilizers are now so 
effective in treating schizophrenia that it is widely considered 
unethical to withhold them from a patient. The implication is 
that the experiments showing tranquilizers to be effective can- 
not be repeated. It is thought to be an unnecessary cruelty to 
deny the patient the most successful treatment for his condi- 
tion. Consequently, there can no longer be a control group of 
schizophrenics that is not given tranquilizers. If critical experi- 
ments in the chemotherapy of brain malfunction can be per- 
formed only once, they must be performed the first time very 
well indeed. 

An even more striking example of such chemotherapy is the 
use of lithium carbonate in the treatment of manic depressives. 
The ingestion of carefully controlled doses of lithium, the 
lightest and simplest metal, produces startling improvements — 
again as reported from the patients’ perspective and from the 
perspective of others — in this agonizing disease. Why so simple 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


201 


a therapy is so strikingly effective is unknown, but it most likely 
relates to the enzyme chemistry of the brain. 

A very strange mental illness is Gilles de la Tourette’s disease 
(named, as always, after the physician who first drew attention 
to it, not after the most celebrated sufferer of the malady ) . One 
of the many motor and speech disorders that are among the 
symptoms of this disease is a remarkable compulsion to utter — 
in whatever language the patient is most fluent — an uninter- 
rupted stream of obscenities and profanities. Physicians 
describe the identification of this disease as “corridor diagnosis”: 
The patient can, with great difficulty, control his compulsion 
for the length of a short medical visit; as soon as the physician 
leaves the room for the corridor, the seatologies overflow like 
the flood from a burst dam. There is a place in the brain that 
makes “dirty” words (and apes may have it). 

There are very few words that the right hemisphere can deal 
with competently — not much more than hello, goodbye, and . . . 
a few choice obscenities. Perhaps Tourette’s disease affects the 
left hemisphere only. The British anthropologist Bernard 
Campbell of Cambridge University suggests that the limbic 
system is rather well integrated with the right cerebral hemi- 
sphere, which, as we have seen, deals much better with emo- 
tions than the left hemisphere does. Whatever else they involve, 
obscenities carry with them strong emotions. Yet Gilles de la 
Tourette’s disease, complex as it is, seems to be a specific 
deficiency in a neuronal transmitter chemical, and appears to be 
alleviated by carefully controlled doses of haloperidol. 

Recent evidence indicates that such limbic hormones as 
ACTH and vasopressin can greatly improve the ability of 
animals to retain and recall memories. These and similar ex- 
amples suggest, if not the ultimate perfectability of the brain, 
at least prospects for its substantial improvement — perhaps 
through altering the abundance or controlling the production 
of small brain proteins. Such examples also greatly relieve the 
burden of guilt commonly experienced by sufferers from a 
mental disease, a burden rarely felt in victims of, say, measles. 


202 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


The remarkable fissurization, convolutions and cortical fold- 
ing of the brain, as well as the fact that the brain fits so snugly 
into the skull, are clear indications that packing more brain into 
the present braincase is going to be difficult. Larger brains with 
larger skulls could not develop until very recently because of 
limits on the size of the pelvis and the birth canal. But the 
advent of Caesarean section — performed rarely two thousand 
years ago but much more commonly today — does permit larger 
brain volumes. Another possibility is a medical technology 
sufficiently advanced to permit full-term development of the 
fetus outside of the uterus. However, the rate of evolutionary 
change is so slow that none of the problems facing us today is 
likely to be overcome by significantly larger neocortices and 
consequent superior intelligences. Before such a time, but not in 
the immediate future, it may be possible, by brain surgery, to 
improve those components of the brain we consider worth im- 
proving and to inhibit further those components that may be 
responsible for some of the perils and contradictions facing 
mankind. But the complexity and redundancy of brain function 
make such a course of action impractical for the near future, 
even if it were socially desirable. We may be able to engineer 
genes before we are able to engineer brains. 

It is sometimes suggested that such experiments may provide 
unscrupulous governments — and there are many of them — with 
tools to control their citizenry still further. For example, we 
can imagine a government that implants hundreds of tiny 
electrodes in the “pleasure” and “pain” centers of the brains of 
newborn children, electrodes capable of remote radio stimula- 
tion — perhaps at frequencies or with access codes known only 
to the government. When the child grows up, the government 
might stimulate his pleasure centers if he has performed, in 
work quota and ideology, an acceptable day’s work; otherwise 
it might stimulate his pain centers. This is a nightmarish vision, 
but I do not think it is an argument against experiments on 
electrical stimulation of the brain. It is, rather, an argument 
against letting the government control the hospitals. Any people 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


203 


that will permit its government to implant such electrodes has 
already lost the battle and may well deserve what it gets. 
As in all such technological nightmares, the principal task is 
to foresee what is possible; to educate the public in its use and 
misuse; and to prevent its organizational, bureaucratic and 
governmental abuse. 

There is already a range of psychotropic and mood-altering 
drugs which are, to varying degrees, dangerous or benign 
(ethyl alcohol is the most widely used and one of the most 
dangerous), and which appear to act on specific areas of the 
R-complex, limbic system and neocortex. If present trends con- 
tinue, even without the encouragement of governments people 
will pursue the home-laboratory synthesis of and self-experi- 
mentation with such drugs — an activity that represents a 
small further step in our knowledge of the brain, its disorders 
and untapped potentials. 

There is reason to think that many alkaloids and other drugs 
which affect behavior work by being chemically similar to 
natural small brain proteins, of which the endorphins are one 
example. Many of these small proteins act on the limbic system 
and are concerned with our emotional states. It is now possible 
to manufacture small proteins made of any specified sequence 
of amino acids. Thus, the time may soon come when a great 
variety of molecules will be synthesized capable of inducing 
human emotional states, including extremely rare ones. For 
example, there is some evidence that atropine — one of the chief 
active ingredients in hemlock, foxglove, deadly nightshade, and 
jimson weed — induces the illusion of flying; and indeed such 
plants seem to have been the principal constituents of unguents 
self-administered to the genital mucosa by witches in the 
Middle Ages — who, rather than actually flying as they boasted, 
were in fact atropine-tripping. But a vivid hallucination of 
flying is an extremely specific sensation to be conveyed by a 
relatively simple molecule. Perhaps there are a range of small 
proteins which will be synthesized and which will produce 
emotional states of a sort never before experienced by human 


204 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


beings. This is one of many potential near-term developments 
in brain chemistry which hold great promise both for good and 
for evil, depending on the wisdom of those who conduct, con- 
trol and apply this research. 


When I leave my office and get into my car, I find that, unless 
I make a specific effort of will, I will drive myself home. When 
I leave home and get into my car, unless I make a similar 
conscious effort, there is a part of my brain that arranges events 
so that I end up at my office. If I change my home or my office, 
after a short period of learning, the new locales supplant the 
old ones, and whatever brain mechanism controls such behavior 
has readily adapted to the new coordinates. This is very much 
like self-programming a part of the brain that works like a 
digital computer. The comparison is even more striking when 
we realize that epileptics, suffering from a psychomotor seizure, 
often go through an exactly comparable set of activities, the 
only difference being perhaps that they run a few more red 
lights than I usually do, but have no conscious memory of 
having performed these actions once the seizure has subsided. 
Such automatism is a typical symptom of temporal-lobe epi- 
lepsy; it also characterizes my first half-hour after awakening. 
Certainly not all of the brain works like a simple digital com- 
puter; the part that does the reprogramming, for example, is 
rather different. But there are enough similarities to suggest 
that a compatible working arrangement between electronic 
computers and at least some components of the brain — in an 
intimate neurophysiological association — can be constructively 
organized. 

The Spanish neurophysiologist Jose Delgado has devised 
working feedback loops between electrodes implanted in the 
brains of chimpanzees and remote electronic computers. Com- 
munication between brain and computer is accomplished 
through a radio link. Miniaturization of electronic computers 
has now reached the stage where such feedback loops can be 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


205 


“hardwired” and do not require a radio link with a remote 
computer terminal. For example, it is entirely possible to devise 
a self-contained feedback loop in which the signs of an on-com- 
ing epileptic seizure are recognized and appropriate brain 
centers are automatically stimulated to forestall or ameliorate 
the attack. We are not yet at the stage where this is a reliable 
procedure, but the time when it will be does not seem very 
far off. 

Perhaps some day it will be possible to add a variety of cogni- 
tive and intellectual prosthetic devices to the brain — a kind of 
eyeglasses for the mind. This would be in the spirit of the past 
accretionary evolution of the brain and is probably far more 
feasible than attempting to restructure the existing brain. 
Perhaps one day we will have surgically implanted in our 
brains small replaceable computer modules or radio terminals 
which will provide us with a rapid and fluent knowledge of 
Basque, Urdu, Amharic, Ainu, Albanian, Nu, Hopi, !Kung, or 
delphinese; or numerical values of the incomplete gamma func- 
tion and the Tschebysheff polynomials; or the natural history of 
animal spoor; or all legal precedents for the ownership of 
floating islands; or radio telepathy connecting several human 
beings, at least temporarily, in a form of symbiotic association 
previously unknown to our species. 

But the real extensions of our brains, particularly for the 
uniquely human aspects of the neocortex, are already in the 
course of being accomplished. Some of them are so old we have 
forgotten that they have occurred. Rich and unrepressive learn- 
ing environments for children represent a remarkably promising 
and successful educational tool. Written language is a notable 
invention that is essentially a simple machine for the storage 
and retrieval of quite complex information. The amount of 
information stored in a large library far exceeds the amount of 
information in either the human genome or the human brain. 
The information is certainly not stored as efficiently as it is in 
biological systems, but it is still serviceably compact, and the 
development of microfilm, microfiche and the like has greatly 


206 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


improved the extrasomatic information storage capabilities of 
mankind. The number of bits of information contained in 
human libraries, works of art, and other cultural institutions 
would provide a point in the chart on page 26 many factors of 
10 beyond the right-hand edge of that figure. 

Writing is, however, very simple machinery. Much more 
sophisticated and far more promising extrasomatic information 
storage and processing lies in the electronic computer. To give 
some idea of the level of development of such computers and 
their programs, they can today play perfect tic-tac-toe, world- 
class checkers, expert chess and practice passable psycho- 
therapy. A computer system now exists which will transcribe a 
live performance of a classical or other melody into conven- 
tional musical notation. The amount of information storage and 
the speed of information processing by computers are, of course, 
prodigious. 

A non-directive psychotherapy program developed by Joseph 
Weizenbaum of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is 
a good example of the present serviceability of psychiatric 
computer programs ( which are, incidentally, far from the most 
difficult or most elaborate programs in existence). After the 
psychotherapy program was developed, a human psychiatrist 
was brought in to relate in lower-case type (via a typewriter 
keyboard on an interactive console) with the program, which 
prints out in upper case. The exchange was probably intended 
as heuristic but may just possibly have gotten out of hand — 
on the human side. The conversation begins with the human 
psychiatrist saying, 

doctor, i have terrible news 

YOU SAY YOU HAVE TERRIBLE NEWS 

yes, there is a computer program at m.i.t. that’ll ruin us 

WHY DO YOU SAY THAT 

i have seen it working 

YOU SAY YOU HAVE SEEN IT WORKING 

it’s frightening — you must see it 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


207 


YOU THINK I MUST SEE IT 
you sound depressed to me 

IN YOUR FANTASY PERHAPS WE SOUND DEPRESSED TO 
EACH OTHER 
yes — perhaps 

I UNDERSTAND 

i do too 

YOU SAY YOU DO TOO 

we are both in the same boat with respect to that 
computer 

let’s CONTINUE TO TALK ABOUT YOU SHALL WE 

you are a comfort 

WHAT MAKES YOU THINK I AM A COMFORT 
at a time like this you want to talk about me 

WHY DO YOU THINK I WANT TO TALK ABOUT YOU 

because you share my feelings about that damned 
computer 

WHAT DOES THAT SUGGEST TO YOU 

that, of course, you hate computers too 

YOU THINK I HATE COMPUTERS TOO 

why not, they’re hardly human, are they 

PERHAPS that’s WHAT WE ARE HERE TO FIND OUT 

no computer could converse as you can, for example 

OH 

i can’t understand how anyone could be fooled by a 
mere machine 
can’t you really 

no. after all, there is nothing creative about 
a computer program 
YOU ARE HEING NEGATIVE 
i am convinced i am correct 

ARE YOU WORRIED TO HAVE BEEN CONVINCED YOU ARE 
CORRECT 

no, not in the least, not at all. not even a little. 

YOU ARE BEING NEGATIVE 

you said you agreed with me, didn’t you 


208 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


IS THAT WHAT YOU HEARD ME SAY 

why don’t you try to dissuade me — computers 
diddle with numbers, that’s all 

YOU WISH ME TO TRY TO DISSUADE YOU 

you can’t 

YOU THINK I CANT 

for example, could a computer in a conversation like 
this raise a new topic 

YOU SEEM TO HAVE AVOIDED SPEAKING OF YOUR PARENTS 
ALTOGETHER 

precisely as you just did 

YOU THINK I JUST DID 

yes, and that’s what shows the difference between 
a man and a computer 

I SEE 

The computer psychiatrist lacks sophistication, training, 
sensitivity, human intuition; it is mechanical (of course!), 
inflexible and relatively unresponsive to emotional nuances and 
nonverbal cues. And yet it has produced a conversation more 
intelligent than many. Its response on “a new topic” is stunning. 
But that response is very likely only a fluke. The program is 
undoubtedly designed to pay attention to words such as 
“mother,” “father,” “parent,” and so on; after the computer’s 
clock has ticked away so many minutes, if these words have 
not been introduced, the program is designed to come up with 
You seem to have avoided . . Emerging at just the moment it 
did, the remark gives an eerie impression of insight. 

But what is the game of psychotherapy if not a very complex, 
learned set of responses to human situations? Is not the 
psychiatrist also preprogrammed to give certain responses? 
Non-directive psychotherapy clearly requires very simple com- 
puter programs, and the appearance of insight requires only 
slightly more sophisticated programs. I do not intend these 
remarks to disparage the psychiatric profession in any way, but 
rather to augur the coming of machine intelligence. Computers 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


209 


are by no means yet at a high enough level of development to 
recommend the widespread use of computer psychotherapy. 
But it does not seem to me a forlorn hope that we may one day 
have extremely patient, widely available and, at least for certain 
problems, adequately competent computer therapists. Some 
programs already in existence are given high marks by patients 
because the therapist is perceived as unbiased and extremely 
generous with his or her or its time. 

Computers are now being developed in the United States 
that will be able to detect and diagnose their own malfunctions. 
When systematic performance errors are found, the faulty com- 
ponents will be automatically bypassed or replaced. Internal 
consistency will be tested by repeated operation and through 
standard programs whose consequences are known inde- 
pendently; repair will be accomplished chiefly by redundant 
components. There are already in existence programs — e.g., in 
chess-playing computers — capable of learning from experience 
and from other computers. As time goes on, the computer ap- 
pears to become increasingly intelligent. Once the programs are 
so complex that their inventors cannot quickly predict all pos- 
sible responses, the machines will have the appearance of, if not 
intelligence, at least free will. Even the computer on the Viking 
Mars lander, which has a memory of only 18,000 words, is at 
this point of complexity: we do not in all cases know what the 
computer will do with a given command. If we knew, we 
would say it is “only” or “merely” a computer. When we do not 
know, we begin to wonder if it is tndy intelligent. 

The situation is very much like the commentary that has 
echoed over the centuries after a famous animal story told both 
by Plutarch and by Pliny: A dog, following the scent of its 
master, was observed to come to a triple fork in the road. It 
ran down the leftmost prong, sniffing; then stopped and re- 
turned to follow the middle prong for a short distance, again 
sniffing and then turning back. Finally, with no sniffing at all, 
it raced joyously down the right-hand prong of the forked road. 

Montaigne, commenting on this story, argued that it showed 


210 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


clear canine syllogistic reasoning: My master has gone down 
one of these roads. It is not the left-hand road; it is not the 
middle road; therefore it must be the right-hand road. There 
is no need for me to corroborate this conclusion by smell — the 
conclusion follows by straightforward logic. 

The possibility that reasoning at all like this might exist in 
the animals, although perhaps less clearly articulated, was 
troubling to many, and long before Montaigne, St. Thomas 
Aquinas attempted unsuccessfully to deal with the story. He 
cited it as a cautionary example of how the appearance of 
intelligence can exist where no intelligence is in fact present. 
Aquinas did not, however, offer a satisfactory alternative ex- 
planation of the dog’s behavior. In human split-brain patients, 
it is quite clear that fairly elaborate logical analysis can proceed 
surrounded by verbal incompetence. 

We are at a similar point in the consideration of machine 
intelligence. Machines are just passing over an important thres- 
hold: the threshold at which, to some extent at least, they give 
an unbiased human being the impression of intelligence. Be- 
cause of a kind of human chauvinism or anthropocentrism, 
many humans are reluctant to admit this possibility. But I 
think it is inevitable. To me it is not in the least demeaning that 
consciousness and intelligence are the result of “mere” matter 
sufficiently complexly arranged; on the contrary, it is an exalt- 
ing tribute to the subtlety of matter and the laws of Nature. 

It by no means follows that computers will in the immediate 
future exhibit human creativity, subtlety, sensitivity or wisdom. 
A classic and probably apocryphal illustration is in the field of 
machine translation of human languages: a language — say, 
English — is input and the text is output in another language — 
say, Chinese. After the completion of an advanced translation 
program, so the story goes, a delegation which included a U.S. 
senator was proudly taken through a demonstration of the 
computer system. The senator was asked to produce an English 
phrase for translation and promptly suggested, “Out of sight, 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


211 


out of mind.” The machine dutifully whirred and winked and 
generated a piece of paper on which were printed a few 
Chinese characters. But the senator could not read Chinese. 
So, to complete the test, the program was run in reverse, the 
Chinese characters input and an English phrase output. The 
visitors crowded around the new piece of paper, which to 
their initial puzzlement read: “Invisible idiot.” 

Existing programs are only marginally competent even on 
matters of this not very high degree of subtlety. It would be 
folly to entrust major decisions to computers at our present 
level of development — not because the computers are not in- 
telligent to a degree, but because, in the case of most complex 
problems, they will not have been given all relevant informa- 
tion. The reliance on computers in determining American 
policy and military actions during the Vietnam war is an 
excellent example of the flagrant misuse of these machines. But 
in reasonably restricted contexts the human use of artificial 
intelligence seems to be one of the two practicable major ad- 
vances in human intelligence available in the near future. ( The 
other is enrichment of the preschool and school learning en- 
vironments of children.) 

Those who have not grown up with computers generally find 
them more frightening than those who have. The legendary 
manic computer biller who will not take no — or even yes — for 
an answer, and who can be satisfied only by receiving a check 
for zero dollars and zero cents is not to be considered repre- 
sentative of the entire tribe; it is a feeble-minded computer to 
begin with, and its mistakes are those of its human program- 
mers. The growing use in North America of integrated circuits 
and small computers for aircraft safety, teaching machines, 
cardiac pacemakers, electronic games, smoke-actuated fire 
alarms and automated factories, to name only a few uses, has 
helped greatly to reduce the sense of strangeness with which 
so novel an invention is usually invested. There are some 
200,000 digital computers in the world today; in another dec- 


212 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


ade, there are likely to be tens of millions. In another genera- 
tion, I think that computers will be treated as a perfectly 
natural — -or at least commonplace — aspect of our lives. 

Consider, for example, the development of small, pocket 
computers. I have in my laboratory a desk-sized computer pur- 
chased with a research grant in the late 1960s for $4,900. I 
also have another product of the same manufacturer, a com- 
puter that fits into the palm of my hand, which was purchased 
in 1975. The new computer does everything that the old com- 
puter did, including programming capability and several ad- 
dressable memories. But it costs $145, and is getting cheaper 
at a breathtaking rate. That represents quite a spectacular ad- 
vance, both in miniaturization and in cost reduction, in a period 
of six or seven years. In fact, the present limit on the size of 
hand-held computers is the requirement that the buttons be 
large enough for our somewhat gross and clumsy human fingers 
to press. Otherwise, such computers could easily be built no 
larger than my fingernail. Indeed, ENIAC, the first large elec- 
tronic digital computer, constructed in 1946, contained 18,000 
vacuum tubes and occupied a large room. The same computa- 
tional ability resides today in a silicon chip microcomputer the 
size of the smallest joint of my little finger. 

The speed of transmission of information in the circuitry of 
such computers is the velocity of light. Human neural trans- 
mission is one million times slower. That in nonarithmetic 
operations the small and slow human brain can still do so much 
better than the large and fast electronic computer is an im- 
pressive tribute to how cleverly the brain is packaged and 
programmed — features brought about, of course, by natural 
selection. Those who possessed poorly programmed brains 
eventually did not live long enough to reproduce. 


Computer graphics have now reached a state of sophistica- 
tion that permits important and novel kinds of learning experi- 
ences in arts and sciences, and in both cerebral hemispheres. 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


213 


There are individuals, many of them analytically extremely 
gifted, who are impoverished in their abilities to perceive and 
imagine spatial relations, particularly three-dimensional geom- 
etry. We now have computer programs that can gradually build 
up complex geometrical forms before our eyes and rotate 
them on a television screen connected to the computer. 

At Cornell University, such a system has been designed 
by Donald Greenberg of the School of Architecture. With 
this system it is possible to draw a set of regularly spaced 
lines which the computer interprets as contour intervals. 
Then, by touching our light pen to any of a number of possible 
instructions on the screen, we command the construction of 
elaborate three-dimensional images which can be made larger 
or smaller, stretched in a given direction, rotated, joined to 
other objects or have designated parts excised. ( See figures on 
pp. 214-2x5.) This is an extraordinary tool for improving our 
ability to visualize three-dimensional forms — a skill extremely 
useful in graphic arts, in science and in technology. It also 
represents an excellent example of cooperation between the 
two cerebral hemispheres: the computer, which is a supreme 
construction of the left hemisphere, teaches us pattern recogni- 
tion, which is a characteristic function of the right hemisphere. 

There are other computer programs that exhibit two- and 
three-dimensional projections of four-dimensional objects. As 
the four-dimensional objects turn, or our perspective changes, 
not only do we see new parts of the four-dimensional objects; 
we also seem to see the synthesis and destruction of entire 
geometrical subunits. The effect is eerie and instructive and 
helps to make four-dimensional geometry much less mysterious; 
we are not nearly so baffled as I imagine a mythical two- 
dimensional creature would be on encountering the typical 
projection ( two squares with the corners connected ) of a three- 
dimensional cube on a flat surface. The classical artistic prob- 
lem of perspective — the projection of three-dimensional objects 
onto two-dimensional canvases — is enormously clarified by 
computer graphics; the computer is obviously also a major tool 


214 THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 



Example of a simple computer graphics routine. Each figure was created 
solely by drawing free-hand contours with a “light pen” on a television 
screen. The computer converted this into perspective drawings in eleva- 
tion from any view angle— directly from the side of this free-form 
sculpture at left and at an angle at right. The tower was “webbed” 


in the quite practical problem of picturing an architect’s design 
of a building, made in two dimensions, from all vantage points 
in three dimensions. 

Computer graphics are now being extended into the area of 
play. There is a popular game, sometimes called Pong, which 
simulates on a television screen a perfectly elastic ball bouncing 
between two surfaces. Each player is given a dial that permits 




THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


*15 



automatically, and is tilted toward the reader in the right-hand diagram. 
In addition to a full capability for rotation and zoom, the observer can 
request with his “light pen” orthogonal, perspective, or stereoscopic 
dynamic images (Program WIRE by Marc Levoy, Laboratory of Com- 
puter Graphics, Cornell University). 


him to intercept the ball with a movable “racket.” Points are 
scored if the motion of the ball is not intercepted by the racket. 
The game is very interesting. There is a clear learning experi- 
ence involved which depends exclusively on Newton’s second 
law for linear motion. As a result of Pong, the player can gain 
a deep intuitive understanding of the simplest Newtonian 
physics — a better understanding even than that provided by 



2l6 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


billiards, where the collisions are far from perfectly elastic 
and where the spinning of the pool balls interposes more com- 
plicated physics. 

This sort of information gathering is precisely what we call 
play. And the important function of play is thus revealed: it 
permits us to gain, without any particular future application 
in mind, a holistic understanding of the world, which is both a 
complement of and a preparation for later analytical activities. 
But computers permit play in environments otherwise totally 
inaccessible to the average student. 

A still more interesting example is provided by the game 
Space War, whose development and delights have been chron- 
icled by Stuart Brand. In Space War, each side controls one or 
more “space vehicles” which can fire missiles at the other. The 
motions of both the spacecraft and the missiles are governed by 
certain rules — for example, an inverse square gravitational field 
set up by a nearby “planet.” To destroy the spaceship of your 
opponent you must develop an understanding of Newtonian 
gravitation that is simultaneously intuitive and concrete. Those 
of us who do not frequently engage in interplanetary space 
flight do not readily evolve a right-hemisphere comprehension 
of Newtonian gravitation. Space War can fill that gap. 

The two games, Pong and Space War, suggest a gradual 
elaboration of computer graphics so that we gain an experi- 
ential and intuitive understanding of the laws of physics. The 
laws of physics are almost always stated in analytical and 
algebraic — that is to say, left-hemisphere — terms; for example, 
Newton’s second law is written F = m a, and the inverse 
square law of gravitation as F = G M m/ r 2 . These analytical 
representations are extremely useful, and it is certainly inter- 
esting that the universe is made in such a way that the motion 
of objects can be described by such relatively simple laws. But 
these laws are nothing more than abstractions from experience. 
Fundamentally they are mnemonic devices. They permit us to 
remember in a simple way a great range of cases that would 
individually be much more difficult to remember — at least in 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


217 


the sense of memory as understood by the left hemisphere. 
Computer graphics gives the prospective physical or biological 
scientist a wide range of experience with the cases his laws of 
nature summarize; but its most important function may be to 
permit those who are not scientists to grasp in an intuitive but 
nevertheless deep manner what the laws of nature are about. 

There are many non-graphical interactive computer pro- 
grams which are extremely powerful teaching tools. The pro- 
grams can be devised by first-rate teachers, and the student has, 
in a curious sense, a much more personal, one-to-one relation- 
ship with the teacher than in the usual classroom setting; he 
may also be as slow as he wishes without fear of embarrass- 
ment. Dartmouth College employs computer learning tech- 
niques in a very broad array of courses. For example, a student 
can gain a deep insight into the statistics of Mendelian genetics 
in an hour with the computer rather than spend a year crossing 
fruit flies in the laboratory. Another student can examine the 
statistical likelihood of becoming pregnant were she to use 
various birth control methods. (This program has built into it 
a one-in-ten-billion chance of a woman’s becoming pregnant 
when strictly celibate, to allow for contingencies beyond present 
medical knowledge. ) 

The computer terminal is a commonplace on the Dartmouth 
campus. A very high proportion of Dartmouth undergraduates 
learn not only to use such programs but also to write their own. 
Interaction with computers is widely viewed as more like fun 
than like work, and many colleges and universities are in the 
process of imitating and extending Dartmouth’s practice. Dart- 
mouth’s preeminence in this innovation is related to the fact that 
its president, John G. Kemeny, is a distinguished computer 
scientist and the inventor of a very simple computer language 
called BASIC. 

The Lawrence Hall of Science is a kind of museum connected 
with the University of California at Berkeley. In its basement 
is a rather modest room filled with about a dozen inexpensive 
computer terminals, each hooked up to a time-sharing mini- 


2l8 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


computer system located elsewhere in the building. Reserva- 
tions for access to these terminals are sold for a modest fee, and 
they may be made up to one hour in advance. The clientele is 
predominantly youngsters, and the youngest are surely less than 
ten years old. A very simple interactive program available there 
is the game Hangman. To play Hangman you type on a fairly 
ordinary typewriter keyboard the computer code “XEQ- 
$HANG”. The computer then types out: 

HANGMAN 

CARE FOR THE RULES? 

If you type “YES”, the machine replies : 

GUESS A LETTER IN THE WORD i’m THINKING OF. 

IF YOU ARE RIGHT, THEN I WILL TELL YOU. BUT 

IF YOU ARE WRONG ( HA, HA ) YOU WILL BE CLOSER 

( SNICKER, SNICKER ) TO DEATH BY HANGING! 

THE WORD HAS EIGHT LETTERS. 

YOUR GUESS IS ... ? 

Let us say you type the response: “E”. The computer then types: 

E 

If you guess wrong, the computer then types out an engaging 
simulacrum (within the limitations of the characters avail- 
able to it) of a human head. And in the usual manner of the 
game there is a race between the gradually emerging word 
and the gradually emerging form of a human being about 
to be hanged. 

In two games of Hangman I recently witnessed, the correct 
answers were “VARIABLE” and “THOUGHT”. If you win the 
game the program — true to its mustache-twirling villainy — 
types out a string of non-letter characters from the top row of 
the typewriter keyboard (used in comic books to indicate 
curses) and then prints: 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


219 


RATS, YOU WIN 

CARE FOR ANOTHER CHANCE TO DIE? 

Other programs are more polite. For example, “XEQ-$KING” 
yields : 

THIS IS THE ANCIENT KINGDOM OF SUMERLA, AND YOU 
ARE ITS VENERATED RULER. THE FATE OF SUMERIA’s 
ECONOMY AND OF YOUR LOYAL SUBJECTS IS ENTIRELY 
IN YOUR HANDS. YOUR MINISTER, HAMMURABI, WILL 
REPORT TO YOU EACH YEAR ON POPULATION AND 
ECONOMY. USING HIS INFORMATION YOU MUST LEARN 
TO ALLOCATE RESOURCES FOR YOUR KINGDOM WISELY. 

SOMEONE IS ENTERING YOUR COUNCIL CHAMBER . . . 

Hammurabi then presents you with relevant statistics on the 
number of acres owned by the city, how many bushels per acre 
were harvested last year, how many were destroyed by rats, 
how many are now in storage, what the present population is, 
how many people died of starvation last year, and how many 
migrated to the city. He begs to inform you of the current ex- 
change rate of land for food and queries how many acres you 
wish to buy. If you ask for too much, the program prints: 

HAMMURABI: PLEASE THINK AGAIN. YOU HAVE ONLY 
TWENTY-EIGHT HUNDRED BUSHELS IN STORE. 

Hammurabi turns out to be an extremely patient and polite 
Grand Vizier. As the years flicker by, you gain a powerful im- 
pression that it may be very difficult, at least in certain market 
economies, to increase both the population and landholdings of 
a state while avoiding poverty and starvation. 

Among the many other programs available is one called 
Grand Prix Racing which permits you to choose from among a 
range of opponents, running from a Model T Ford to a 1973 





THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 221 


Ferrari. If your speed or acceleration are too low at appropriate 
places on the track, you lose; if too high, you crash. Since dis- 
tances, velocities and accelerations must be given explicitly, 
there is no way to play this game without learning some physics. 
The array of possible courses of computer interactive learning 
is limited only by the ingenuity of the programmers, and that 
is a well that runs very deep. 

Since our society is so profoundly influenced by science and 
technology, which the bulk of our citizens understand poorly or 
not at all, the widespread availability in both schools and homes 
of inexpensive interactive computer facilities could just possibly 
play an important role in the continuance of our civilization. 


The only objection I have ever heard to the widespread use of 
pocket calculators and small computers is that, if introduced 
to children too early, they preempt the learning of arithmetic, 
trigonometry and other mathematical tasks that the machine is 
able to perform faster and more accurately than the student. 
This debate has occurred before. 

In Plato’s Phaedrus — the same Socratic dialogue I referred 
to earlier for its metaphor of chariot, charioteer and two horses 
— there is a lovely myth about the god Thoth, the Egyptian 
equivalent of Prometheus. In the tongue of ancient Egypt, the 
phrase that designates written language means literally “The 
Speech of the Gods.” Thoth is discussing his invention* of writ- 

° According to the Roman historian Tacitus, the Egyptians claimed to 
have taught the alphabet to the Phoenicians, “who, controlling the seas, 
introduced it to Greece and were credited with inventing what they had 


A statue of Gudea, the Neo-Sumerian governor of Lagash, about 2150 b.c. 
Cuneiform writing, which covers Gudea’s robe, was widespread in this 
era, the Third Dynasty of Ur, a time of maritime trade, commercial ex- 
uberance, and the earliest known legal code — all intimately connected 
with the proliferation of literacy. 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Purchase, The Harris Brisbane Dick Fund, 1959. Repro- 
duced by permission. 



Example of early Egyptian hieroglyphics from a tablet of Sesostris I 
at Karnak. 

ing with Thamus (also called Ammon), a god-king who rebukes 
him in these words: 

This discovery of yours will create forgetfulness in the learners’ 
souls, because they will not use their memories; they will trust 
to the external written characters and not remember of them- 
selves. The specific which you have discovered is an aid not to 


really borrowed.” According to legend, the alphabet arrived in Greece 
with Cadmus, Prince of Tyre, seeking his sister, Europa, who had been 
stolen away to the island of Crete by Zeus, king of the gods, temporarily 
disguised as a bull. To protect Europa from those who would steal her 
back to Phoenicia, Zeus ordered a bronze robot made which, with clank- 
ing steps, patrolled Crete and turned back or sank all approaching foreign 
vessels. Cadmus, however, was elsewhere — unsuccessfully seeking his 
sister in Greece when a dragon devoured all his men; whereupon he slew 
the dragon and, in response to instructions from the goddess Athena, 
sowed the dragon’s teeth in the furrows of a plowed field. Each tooth 
became a warrior; and Cadmus and his men together founded Thebes, 
the first civilized Greek city, bearing the same name as one of the two 
capital cities of ancient Egypt. It is curious to find in the same legendary 
account the invention of writing, the founding of Greek civilization, the 
first known reference to artificial intelligence, and the continuing warfare 
between humans and dragons. 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


memory, but to reminiscence, and you give your disciples not 
truth, but only the semblance of truth; they will be hearers of 
many things and will have learned nothing; they will appear to 
be omniscient and will generally know nothing; they will be 
tiresome company, having the show of wisdom without its 
reality. 

I am sure there is some truth to Thamus’ complaint. In our 
modern world, illiterates have a different sense of direction, a 

A microprocessing unit of a microcomputer, about half a centimeter on 
a side. It is an integrated circuit deposited on a single crystal silicon 
chip and containing about 5,400 transistors. 





224 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


different sense of self-reliance, and a different sense of reality. 
But before the invention of writing, human knowledge was 
restricted to what one person or a small group could remember. 
Occasionally, as with the Vedas and the two great epic poems 
of Homer, a substantial body of information could be pre- 
served. But there were, so far as we know, few Homers. After 
the invention of writing, it was possible to collect, integrate and 
utilize the accumulated wisdom of all times and peoples; 
humans were no longer restricted to what they and their im- 
mediate acquaintances could remember. Literacy gives us ac- 
cess to the greatest and most influential minds in history: 
Socrates, say, or Newton have had audiences vastly larger than 
the total number of people either met in his whole lifetime. 
The repeated rendering of an oral tradition over many genera- 
tions inevitably leads to errors in transmission and the gradual 
loss of the original content, a degradation of information that 
occurs far more slowly with the successive reprinting of written 
accounts. 

Books are readily stored. We can read them at our own 
pace without disturbing others. We can go back to the hard 
parts, or delight once again in the particularly enjoyable parts. 
They are mass-produced at relatively low cost. And reading it- 
self is an amazing activity: You glance at a thin, flat object 
made from a tree, as you are doing at this moment, and the 
voice of the author begins to speak inside your head. (Hello!) 
The improvement in human knowledge and survival potential 
following the invention of writing was immense. (There was 
also an improvement in self-reliance: It is possible to learn at 
least the rudiments of an art or a science from a book and not 
be dependent on the lucky accident that there is a nearby 
master craftsman to whom we may apprentice ourselves. ) 

When all is said and done, the invention of writing must be 
reckoned not only as a brilliant innovation but as a surpassing 
good for humanity. And assuming that we survive long enough 
to use their inventions wisely, I believe the same will be said 


THE FUTURE EVOLUTION OF THE BRAIN 


225 


of the modern Thoths and Prometheuses who are today devis- 
ing computers and programs at the edge of machine intelli- 
gence. The next major structural development in human intel- 
ligence is likely to be a partnership between intelligent humans 
and intelligent machines. 



IX 

KNOWLEDGE 
IS OUR DESTINY: 
TERRESTRIAL AND 
EXTRATERRESTRIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 




The silent hours steal on . . . 

Wm. Shakespeare 
King Richard III 


The question of all questions for humanity, the prob- 
lem which lies behind all others and is more interest- 
ing than any of them is that of the determination 
of man’s place in Nature and his relation to the 
Cosmos. Whence our race came, what sorts of limits 
are set to our power over Nature and to Nature’s 
power over us, to what goal we are striving, are the 
problems which present themselves afresh, with un- 
diminished interest, to every human being born on 
earth. 

T. H. Huxley, 1863 


nd so at last I return to one of the questions with 
which I started: the search for extraterrestrial in- 
telligence. While the suggestion is sometimes made 
that the preferred channel of interstellar discourse 
will be telepathic, this seems to me at best a playful notion. 
At any rate, there is not the faintest evidence in support of 
it; and I have yet to see even moderately convincing evi- 
dence for telepathic transmission on this planet. We are not 
yet capable of significant interstellar space flight, although 
some other more advanced civilization might be. Despite all 
the talk of unidentified flying objects and ancient astronauts, 
there is no serious evidence that we have been or are being 
visited. 

That, then, leaves machines. Communication with extra- 
terrestrial intelligence may employ the electromagnetic spec- 
trum, and most likely the radio part of the spectrum; or it might 
employ gravity waves, neutrinos, just conceivably tachyons (if 
they exist), or some new aspect of physics that will not be 
discovered for another three centuries. But whatever the chan- 
nel, it will require machines to use, and if our experience in 
radioastronomy is any guide, computer-actuated machines with 
abilities approaching what we might call intelligence. To run 
through many days’ worth of data on 1,008 different fre- 
quencies, where the information may vary every few seconds 
or faster, cannot be done well by visually scanning the records. 
It requires autocorrelation techniques and large electronic 
computers. And this situation, which applies to observations 
that Frank Drake of Cornell and I have recently performed at 




THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


230 


the Arecibo Observatory, can only become more complex — 
that is, more dependent on computers — with the listening 
devices likely to be employed in the near future. We can design 
receiving and transmitting programs of immense complexity. 
If we are lucky we will employ stratagems of great cleverness 
and elegance. But we cannot avoid utilizing the remarkable 
capabilities of machine intelligence if we wish to search for 
extraterrestrial intelligence. 

The number of advanced civilizations in the Milky Way 
Galaxy today depends on many factors, ranging from the num- 
ber of planets per star to the likelihood of the origin of life. 
But once life has started in a relatively benign environment 
and billions of years of evolutionary time are available, the 
expectation of many of us is that intelligent beings would 
develop. The evolutionary path would, of course, be different 
from that taken on Earth. The precise sequence of events that 
have taken place here — including the extinction of the dino- 
saurs and the recession of the Pliocene and Pleistocene forests 
— have probably not occurred in precisely the same way any- 
where else in the entire universe. But there should be many 
functionally equivalent pathways to a similar end result. 
The entire evolutionary record on our planet, particularly the 
record contained in fossil endocasts, illustrates a progressive 
tendency toward intelligence. There is nothing mysterious 
about this: smart organisms by and large survive better and 
leave more offspring than stupid ones. The details will certainly 
depend on circumstances, as, for example, if nonhuman pri- 
mates with language have been exterminated by humans, while 
slightly less communicative apes ignored by our ancestors. But 
the general trend seems quite clear and should apply to the 
evolution of intelligent life elsewhere. Once intelligent beings 
achieve technology and the capacity for self-destruction of their 
species, the selective advantage of intelligence becomes more 
uncertain. 

And what if we receive a message? Is there any reason to 
think that the transmitting beings — evolved over billions of 


KNOWLEDGE IS OUR DESTINY 


231 



“Stars” by M. C. Escher. 


years of geological time in an environment vastly different from 
our own — would be sufficiently similar to us for their messages 
to be understood? I think the answer must be yes. A civilization 
transmitting radio messages must at least know about radio. 
The frequency, time constant, and bandpass of the message are 
common to transmitting and receiving civilizations. The situa- 



232 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


tion may be a little like that of amateur or ham radio operators. 
Except for occasional emergencies, their conversations seem 
almost exclusively concerned with the mechanics of their in- 
struments: it is the one aspect of their lives they are certain to 
have in common. 

But I think the situation is far more hopeful than this. We 
know that the laws of nature — or at least many of them — are 
the same everywhere. We can detect by spectroscopy the same 
chemical elements, the same common molecules on other 
planets, stars and galaxies; and the fact that the spectra are 
the same shows that the same mechanisms by which atoms and 
molecules are induced to absorb and emit radiation exist 
everywhere. Distant galaxies can be observed moving ponder- 
ously about each other in precise accord with the same laws of 
gravitation that determine the motion of a tiny artificial satel- 
lite about our pale blue planet Earth. Gravity, quantum me- 
chanics, and the great bulk of physics and chemistry are ob- 
served to be the same elsewhere as here. 

Intelligent organisms evolving on another world may not be 
like us biochemically. They will almost certainly have evolved 
significantly different adaptations— from enzymes to organ 
systems — to deal with the different circumstances of their 
several worlds. But they must still come to grips with the 
same laws of nature. 

The laws of falling bodies seem simple to us. At constant 
acceleration, as provided by Earth’s gravity, the velocity of a 
falling object increases proportional to the time; the distance 
fallen proportional to the square of the time. These are very 
elementary relations. Since Galileo at least, they have been 
fairly generally grasped. Yet we can imagine a universe in 
which the laws of nature are immensely more complex. But we 
do not live in such a universe. Why not? I think it may be 
because all those organisms who perceived their universe as 
very complex are dead. Those of our arboreal ancestors who 
had difficulty computing their trajectories as they brachiated 
from tree to tree did not leave many offspring. Natural selec- 


KNOWLEDGE IS OUR DESTINY 


233 


tion has served as a kind of intellectual sieve, producing brains 
and intelligences increasingly competent to deal with the laws 
of nature. This resonance, extracted by natural selection, be- 
tween our brains and the universe may help explain a quandary 
set by Einstein: The most incomprehensible property of the 
universe, he said, is that it is so comprehensible. 

If this is so, the same evolutionary winnowing must have 
occurred on other worlds that have evolved intelligent beings. 
Extraterrestrial intelligences that lack avian or arboreal an- 
cestors may not share our passion for space flight. But all 
planetary atmospheres are relatively transparent in the visible 
and radio parts of the spectrum — because of the quantum 
mechanics of the cosmically most abundant atoms and mole- 
cules. Organisms throughout the universe should therefore be 
sensitive to optical and/or radio radiation, and, after the devel- 
opment of physics, the idea of electromagnetic radiation for 
interstellar communication should be a cosmic commonplace — 
a convergent idea evolving independently on countless worlds 
throughout the galaxy after the local discovery of elementary 
astronomy, what we might call the facts of life. If we are 
fortunate enough to make contact with some of those other 
beings, I think we will find that much of their biology, 
psychology, sociology and politics will seem to us stunningly 
exotic and deeply mysterious. But I suspect we will have little 
difficulty in understanding each other on the simpler aspects 
of astronomy, physics, chemistry and perhaps mathematics. 

I would certainly not expect their brains to be anatomically or 
physiologically or perhaps even chemically close to ours. Their 
brains will have had different evolutionary histories in different 
environments. We have only to look at terrestrial beasts with 
substantially different organ systems to see how much variation 
in brain physiology is possible. There is, for example, an African 
fresh-water fish, the Mormyrid, which often lives in murky 
water where visual detection of predators, prey or mates is 
difficult. The Mormyrid has developed a special organ which 
establishes an electric field and monitors that field for any crea- 


*34 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


tures traversing it. This fish possesses a cerebellum that covers 
the entire back of its brain in a thick layer reminiscent of the 
neocortex of mammals. The Mormyrids have a spectacularly 
different sort of brain, and yet in the most fundamental bio- 
logical sense they are far more closely related to us than any 
intelligent extraterrestrial beings. 

The brains of extraterrestrials will probably have several or 
many components slowly accreted by evolution, as ours have. 
There may still be a tension among their components as among 
ours, although the hallmark of a successful, long-lived civiliza- 
tion may be the ability to achieve a lasting peace among the 
several brain components. They almost certainly will have 
significantly extended their intelligence extrasomatically, by 
employing intelligent machines. But I think it highly probable 
that our brains and machines and their brains and machines will 
ultimately understand one another very well. 

The practical benefits as well as the philosophical insights 
likely to accrue from the receipt of a long message from an 
advanced civilization are immense. But how great the benefits 
and how fast we can assimilate them depend on the details of 
the message contents, about which it is difficult to make reli- 
able predictions. One consequence, however, seems clear; the 
receipt of a message from an advanced civilization will show 
that there are advanced civilizations, that there are methods of 
avoiding the self-destruction that seems so real a danger of our 
present technological adolescence. Thus the receipt of an inter- 
stellar message would provide a very practical benefit that in 
mathematics is called the existence theorem — in this case the 
demonstration that it is possible for societies to live and prosper 
with advanced technology. Finding a solution to a problem is 
helped enormously by the certain knowledge that a solution 
exists. This is one of many curious connections between the 
existence of intelligent life elsewhere and the existence of intel- 
ligent life on Earth. 



The plaque aboard the Pioneer 10 and n spacecraft, the first vehicles 
of mankind to venture into interstellar space. The 6 -by-g-inch gold 
anodized aluminum plaques convey, in what is hoped is easily under- 
stood scientific language, some information on the locale, epoch, and 
nature of the builders of the spacecraft. Interstellar radio messages can 
be much richer in information content than this message in a bottle 
cast into the cosmic ocean. 


While more rather than less knowledge and intelligence 
seems so clearly the only way out of our present difficulties and 
the only aperture to a significant future for mankind ( or indeed 
to any future at all ) , this is not a view always adopted in prac- 
tice. Governments often lose sight of the difference between 
short-term and long-term benefits. The most important prac- 
tical benefits have come about from the most unlikely and 
apparently impractical scientific advances. Radio is today not 
only the prime channel in the search for extraterrestrial intel- 
ligence, it is the means by which emergencies are responded 


236 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


to, news is transmitted, telephone calls relayed and global 
entertainment aired. Yet radio came about because a Scottish 
physicist, James Clerk Maxwell, invented a term, which he 
called the displacement current, in a set of partial differential 
equations now known as Maxwell’s equations. He proposed the 
displacement current essentially because the equations were 
aesthetically more appealing with it than without it. 

The universe is intricate and elegant. We wrest secrets from 
nature by the most unlikely routes. Societies will, of course, 
wish to exercise prudence in deciding which technologies — 
that is, which applications of science- — are to be pursued and 
which not. But without funding basic research, without sup- 
porting the acquisition of knowledge for its own sake, our 
options become dangerously limited. Only one physicist in a 
thousand need stumble upon something like the displacement 
current to make the support of all thousand a superb invest- 
ment for society. Without vigorous, farsighted and continuing 
encouragement of fundamental scientific research, we are in 
the position of eating our seed com: we may fend off starva- 
tion for one more winter, but we have removed the last hope 
of surviving the following winter. 

In a time in some respects similar to our own, St. Augustine 
of Hippo, after a lusty and intellectually inventive young man- 
hood, withdrew from the world of sense and intellect and ad- 
vised others to do likewise: “There is another form of tempta- 
tion, even more fraught with danger. This is the disease of 
curiosity. ... It is this which drives us on to try to discover the 
secrets of nature, those secrets which are beyond our under- 
standing, which can avail us nothing and which men should 
not wish to learn. ... In this immense forest, full of pitfalls 
and perils, I have drawn myself back, and pulled myself away 
from these thorns. In the midst of all these things which float 
unceasingly around me in everyday life, I am never surprised 
at any of them, and never captivated by my genuine desire to 
study them. ... I no longer dream of the stars.” The time of 


KNOWLEDGE IS OUR DESTINY 


237 


Augustine’s death, 430 a.d., marks the beginning of the Dark 
Ages in Europe. 

In the last chapter of The Ascent of Man Bronowski con- 
fessed himself saddened “to find myself suddenly surrounded 
in the West by a sense of terrible loss of nerve, a retreat from 
knowledge.” He was talking, I think, partly about the very 
limited understanding and appreciation of science and tech- 
nology — which have shaped our lives and civilizations — in pub- 
lic and political communities; but also about the increasing 
popularity of various forms of marginal, folk- or pseudo-science, 
mysticism and magic. 

There is today in the West (but not in the East) a resurgent 
interest in vague, anecdotal and often demonstrably erroneous 
doctrines that, if true, would betoken at least a more interest- 
ing universe, but that, if false, imply an intellectual careless- 
ness, an absence of toughmindedness, and a diversion of 
energies not very promising for our survival. Such doctrines 
include astrology (the view that which stars, one hundred 
trillion miles away, are rising at the moment of my birth in a 
closed building affect my destiny profoundly); the Bermuda 
Triangle ‘mystery” (which holds in many versions that an 
unidentified flying object lives in the ocean off Bermuda and 
eats ships and airplanes); flying saucer accounts in general; 
the belief in ancient astronauts; the photography of ghosts; 
pyramidology (including the view that my razor blade stays 
sharper within a cardboard pyramid than within a cardboard 
cube); Scientology; auras and Kirlian photography; the emo- 
tional lives and musical preferences of geraniums; psychic sur- 
gery; flat and hollow earths; modern prophecy; remote cutlery 
warping; astral projections; Velikovskian catastrophism; Atlantis 
and Mu; spiritualism; and the doctrine of the special creation, 
by God or gods, of mankind despite our deep relatedness, both 
in biochemistry and in brain physiology, with the other ani- 
mals. It may be that there are kernels of truth in a few of these 
doctrines, but their widespread acceptance betokens a lack of 


238 


THE DRAGONS OF EDEN 


intellectual rigor, an absence of skepticism, a need to replace 
experiments by desires. These are by and large, if I may use 
the phrase, limbic and right-hemisphere doctrines, dream pro- 
tocols, natural — the word is certainly perfectly appropriate — 
and human responses to the complexity of the environment we 
inhabit. But they are also mystical and occult doctrines, de- 
vised in such a way that they are not subject to disproof and 
characteristically impervious to rational discussion. In contrast, 
the aperture to a bright future lies almost certainly through the 
full functioning of the neocortex — reason alloyed with intuition 
and with limbic and R-complex components, to be sure, but 
reason nonetheless: a courageous working through of the 
world as it really is. 

It is only in the last day of the Cosmic Calendar that sub- 
stantial intellectual abilities have evolved on the planet Earth. 
The coordinated functioning of both cerebral hemispheres is 
the tool Nature has provided for our survival. We are unlikely 
to survive if we do not make full and creative use of our human 
intelligence. 

“We are a scientific civilization,” declared Jacob Bronowski. 
“That means a civilization in which knowledge and its integrity 
are crucial. Science is only a Latin word for knowledge. . . . 
Knowledge is our destiny.” 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


To write a book on a subject so far from one’s primary training is 
at best incautious. But, as I have tried to explain, the temptation 
was irresistible. Whatever virtues this book may have are largely 
thanks to those who performed the fundamental research de- 
scribed, and to those professionals in the biological and social sci- 
ences who were kind enough to read and- react to my arguments. I 
am indebted for critical comments and stimulating discussions to 
the late L. S. B. Leakey and Hans-Lukas Teuber, to Joshua Leder- 
berg, James Maas, John Eisenberg, Bernard Campbell, Lester and 
David Grinspoon, Stephen Jay Gould, William Dement, Geoffrey 
Bourne, Philip Morrison, Charles Hockett, Ernest Hartmann, Richard 
Gregory, Paul Rozin, Jon Lomberg, Timothy Ferris, and particularly 
to Paul MacLean. I appreciate the painstaking care which several 
of them, as well as editor Anne Freedgood and copy editor Nancy 
Inglis, both at Random House, took in reading earlier drafts of this 
book. They are, it is probably unnecesary to add, not to be held 
responsible for my speculations or for any errors which may be found 
herein. I am grateful to Linda Sagan and Sally Forbes for picture 
research; to several colleagues for preprints of scientific reports in 
advance of publication; and to Don Davis for the cover painting, 
which is intended not as a literal depiction of any particular epoch 
in Earth history, but as a metaphor of a few of the ideas set forth 
above. Some of this work was made possible by the institution of 
sabbatic leave at Cornell University. I am also grateful for their kind 
hospitality to L. E. H. Trainor, M. Silverman, C. Lumsden and 
Andrew Baines, Principal of New College, all affiliated with the 
University of Toronto. Substantial parts of Chapter 1 appeared in 
the magazine Natural History. Some of the ideas in this book were 
first presented at a joint colloquium of the Massachusetts Mental 
Health Center and Harvard University Medical School’s Depart- 




240 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


ment of Psychiatry, and at an L. S. B. Leakey Foundation lecture at 
the California Institute of Technology. The production of this book 
owes much to the typing skills of Mary Roth and, especially, to the 
dedicated transcription and retyping through many drafts by Shirley 
Arden. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Allison, T., and D. V. Cicchetti. “Sleep in Mammals: Ecological 
and Constitutional Correlates.” Science, Vol. 149, pp. 732- 
734. 1976. 

Akehart-Treichel, Joan. “Brain Peptides and Psychopharmacol- 
ogy.” Science News, Vol. no, pp. 202-206, 1976. 

Aronson, L. R., Tobach, E., Lehrman, D. S., and J. S. Rosen- 
blatt, eds. Development and Evolution of Behavior: Es- 
says in Memory of T. C. Schneirla. W. H. Freeman, San 
Francisco, 1970. 

Barker, Robert T. “Dinosaur Renaissance.” Scientific American, 
Vol. 232, pp. 58-72 et seq., April 1975. 

Bitterman, M. E. “Phyletic Differences in Learning.” American 
Psychologist, Vol. 20, pp. 396-410, 1965. 

Bloom, F., D. Segal, N. Ling and R. Guillemin. “Endorphins: 
Profound Behavioral Effects in Rats Suggest New Etiolog- 
ical Factors in Mental Illness.” Science, Vol. 194, pp. 630- 
632, 1976. 

Bogen, J. E. The Other Side of the Brain. II. An Appositional 
Mind.” Bulletin Los Angeles Neurological Societies, Vol. 34, 
PP- 135-162, 1969. 

Bramlette, M. N. “Massive Extinctions in Biota at the End of 
Mesozoic Time.” Science, Vol. 148, pp. 1696-1699, 1965. 

Brand, Stewart. Two Cybernetic Frontiers. Random House, New 
York, 1974. 

Brazier, M. A. B. The Electrical Activity of the Nervous System. 
Macmillan, New York, i960. 

Bronowski, Jacob. The Ascent of Man. Little, Brown, Boston, 
1973- 

Britten, R. J., and E. H. Davidson. “Gene Regulation for Higher 
Cells: A Theory.” Science, Vol. 165, pp. 349-357, 1969. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


242 


Clark, W. E. LeGros. The Antecedents of Man: An Introduction to 
the Evolution of the Primates. Edinburgh University Press, 
Edinburgh, 1959. 

Colbert, Edwin. Dinosaurs: Their Discovery and Their World. 
E. P. Dutton, New York, 1961. 

Cole, Sonia. Leakey’s Luck: The Life of Louis S. B. Leakey. Har- 
court Brace Jovanovich, New York, 1975. 

Coppens, Yves. “The Great East African Adventure.” CNRS Re- 
search, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 2-12, 1976. 

Coppens, Yves, F. Clark Howell, Glynn Ll. Isaac, and Richard 
E. F. Leakey, eds. Earliest Man and Environments in the 
Lake Rudolf Basin: Stratigraphy, Palaeoecology and Evolu- 
tion. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1976. 

Culliton, Barbara J. “The Haemmerli Affair: Is Passive Euthan- 
asia Murder?” Science, Vol. 190, pp. 1271-1275, 1975. 

Cutler, Richard G. “Evolution of Human Longevity and the Gene- 
tic Complexity Governing Aging Rate.” Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 72, pp. 4664-4668, 1975. 

Dement, William C. Some Must Watch While Some Must Sleep. 
W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1974. 

DeRenzi, E., Faglioni, P., and H. Spinnler. “The Performance of 
Patients with Unilateral Brain Damage on Face Recognition 
Tasks.” Cortex, Vol. 4, pp. 17-34, 1968. 

Dewson, J. H. “Preliminary Evidence of Hemispheric Asymmetry 
of Auditory Function in Monkeys.” In Lateralization in the 
Nervous System, S. Harnad, ed. Academic Press, New York, 
1976. 

Dimond, Stuart, Linda Farrington and Peter Johnson. “Differing 
Emotional Responses from Right and Left Hemispheres.” 
Nature, Vol. 261, pp. 690-692, 1976. 

Dimond, S. J., and J. G. Beaumont, eds. Hemisphere Function in 
the Human Brain. Wiley, New York, 1974. 

Dobzhansky, Theodosius. Mankind Evolving: The Evolution of the 
Human Species. Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn., 
1962. 

Doty, Robert W. “The Brain.” Britannica Yearbook of Science and 
the Future, Encyclopaedia Britannica, Chicago, 1970, pp. 
34 - 53 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


243 


Eccles, John C. The Understanding of the Brain. McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1973. 

Eccles, John C., ed., Brain and Conscious Experience. Springer- 
Verlag, New York, 1966. 

Eimerl, Sarel, and Irven DeVore. The Primates. Life Nature 
Library, Time, Inc., New York, 1965. 

Farb, Peter. Mans Rise to Civilization as Shown by the Indians of 
North America from Primeval Times to the Coming of the 
Industrial State. E. P. Dutton, New York, 1968. 

Fink, Donald G. Computers and the Human Mind: An Introduction 
to Artificial Intelligence. Doubleday Anchor Books, New 
York, 1966. 

Frisch, John H. “Research on Primate Behavior in Japan.” Ameri- 
can Anthropologist, Vol. 61, pp. 584-596, 1959. 

Fromm, Erich. The Forgotten Language: An Introduction to the 
Understanding of Dreams, Fairy Tales and Myths. Grove 
Press, New York, 1951. 

Galin, D., and R. Ornstein. “Lateral Specialization of Cognitive 
Mode: An EEG Study.” Psychophysiology, Vol. 9, pp. 412- 
418, 1972. 

Gantt, Elizabeth. “Phycobilisomes: Light-Harvesting Pigment 
Complexes.” Bioscience, Vol. 25, pp. 781-788, 1975. 

Gardner, R. A., and Beatrice T. Gardner. “Teaching Sign- 
Language to a Chimpanzee.” Science, Vol. 165, pp. 664-672, 

1969- 

Gazzaniga, M. S. “The Split Brain in Man.” Scientific American, Vol. 
217, pp. 24-29, 1967. 

Gazzaniga, M. S. “Consistency and Diversity in Brain Organiza- 
tion.” Proceedings Conference on Evolution and Lateraliza- 
tion of the Brain, Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, 1977. 

Gerard, Ralph W. “What Is Memory?” Scientific American, Vol. 
189, pp. 118-126, September 1953. 

Goodall, Jane. “Tool-Using and Aimed Throwing in a Community 
of Free-Living Chimpanzees.” Nature, Vol. 201, pp. 1264- 
1266, 1964. 

Gould, Stephen Jay. “This View of Life: Darwin’s Untimely 
Burial.” Natural History, Vol. 85, pp. 24-30, October 1976. 


*44 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Gray, George W. “The Great Ravelled Knot.” Scientific American, 
Vol. 179, pp. 26-39, October 1948. 

Griffith, Richard M., Miyagi, Otoya, and Tago, Akira. “The 
Universality of Typical Dreams: Japanese vs. Americans.” 
American Anthropologist, Vol. 60, pp. 1173—1179, 1958. 

Grinspoon, Lester, Ewalt, J. R., and R. I. Schader. Schizophrenia: 
Pharmacotherapy and Psychotherapy. Williams &amp; Wilkins: 
Baltimore, 1972. 

Hamilton, C. R. “An Assessment of Hemispheric Specialization in 
Monkeys.” Proceedings Conference on Evolution and Laterali- 
zation of the Brain, Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, 19 77. 

Harner, M. J., ed. Hallucinogens and Shamanism. Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, London, 1973. 

Harris, Marvin. Cows, Pigs, Wars and Witches: The Riddles of 
Culture. Random House, New York, 1974. 

Hartmann, Ernest L. The Functions of Sleep. Yale University 
Press, New Haven, Conn., 1973. 

Hayes, C. The Ape in Our House. Harper, New York, 1951. 

Herrick, C. Judson. “A Sketch of the Origin of the Cerebral Hemi- 
spheres.” Journal of Comparative Neurology, Vol. 32, pp. 
429-454, 1921. 

Holloway, Ralph L. “Cranial Capacity and the Evolution of the 
Human Brain.” American Anthropologist, Vol. 68, pp. 103- 
121, 1966. 

Holloway, Ralph L. “The Evolution of the Primate Brain: Some 
Aspects of Quantitative Relations.” Brain Research, Vol. 7, 
pp. 121-172, 1968. 

Howell, F. Clark. Early Man. Life Nature Library, Time, Inc., 
New York, 1965. 

Howells, William. Mankind in the Making: The Story of Human 
Evolution. Rev. ed. Doubleday, New York, 1967. 

Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. “Receptive Fields of Single 
Neurons in the Cat’s Striate Cortex,” Journal of Physiology, 
Vol. 150, pp. 91-104, i960. 

Ingram, D. “Cerebral Speech Lateralization in Young Children.” 
Neuropsychologia, Vol. 13, pp. 103-105, 1975. 

Jerison, H. J. Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence. Academic 
Press, New York, 1973. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


245 


Jerison, H. J. “The Theory of Encephalization.” Proceedings Con- 
ference on Evolution and Lateralization of the Brain, Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 19 77. 

Keller, Helen. The Story of My Life. New York, 1902. 

Korsakov, S. “On the Psychology of Microcephalies [1893].” Re- 
printed in the American Journal of Mental Deficiency Re- 
search, Vol. 4, pp. 42-47, 1957. 

Kroeber, T. Ishi in Two Worlds. University of California Press, 
Berkeley, 1961. 

Kurten, Bjorn. Not from the Apes: The History of Mans Origins 
and Evolution. Vintage Books, New York, 1972. 

La Barre, Weston. The Human Animal. University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, 1954. 

Langer, Susanne. Philosophy in a New Key: A Study in the Sym- 
bolism of Reason, Rite and Art. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, Mass., 1942. 

Lashley, K. S. “Persistent Problems in the Evolution of Mind.” 
Quarterly Review of Biology, Vol. 24, pp. 28-42, 1949. 

Lashley, K . S. “In Search of the Engram.” Symposia of the Society 
of Experimental Biology, Vol. 4, pp. 454-482, 1950. 

Leakey, Richard E. “Hominids in Africa.” American Scientist, Vol. 
64, No. 2, p. 174, 1976. 

Leakey, R. E. F., and A. C. Walker. “Australopithecus, Homo 
erectus and the Single Species Hypothesis.” Nature, Vol. 261, 
PP- 572-574. 1976- 

Lee, Richard, and Irven DeVore, eds. Man, the Hunter. Aldine, 
Chicago, 1968. 

Le May, M., and Geschwind, N. “Hemispheric Differences in the 
Brains of Great Apes.” Brain Behavior and Evolution. Vol. 
n. PP- 48-52, 1975- 

Lettvin, J. Y., Matturana, H. R., McCulloch, W. S., and Pitts, 
W. J. “What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain.” Proceed- 
ings of the Institute of Radio Engineers, Vol. 47, pp. 1940- 
195L 1959- 

Lieberman, P., Klatt, D., and W. H. Wilson. “Vocal Tract Limita- 
tions on the Vowel Repertoires of Rhesus Monkeys and Other 
Non-Human Primates.” Science, Vol. 164, pp. 1185-1187, 1969. 

Linden, Eugene. Apes, Men and Language. E. P. Dutton, New York, 
1974- 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


246 


Loncuet-Higgins, H. C. “Perception of Melodies.” Nature, Vol. 263, 
pp. 646-653, 1976. 

MacLean, Paul D. On the Evolution of Three Mentalities, to be 
published. 

MacLean, Paul, D. A Triune Concept of the Brain and Behaviour. 
University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1973. 

McCulloch, W. S., and Pitts, W. “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas 
Immanent in Nervous Activity.” Bulletin of Mathematical 
Biophysics, Vol. 5, pp. 115-133, 1943. 

McHenry, Henry. “Fossils and the Mosaic Nature of Human Evolu- 
tion.” Science, Vol. 190, pp. 425-431, 1975. 

Meddis, Ray. On the Function of Sleep.” Animal Behaviour, Vol. 
23, pp. 676-691, 1975. 

Mettler, F. A. Culture and the Structural Evolution of the Neural 
System. American Museum of Natural History, New York, 
1956 . 

Milner, Brenda, Corkin, Suzanne and Teuber, Hans-Lukas. “Fur- 
ther Analysis of the Hippocampal Amnesic Syndrome: 14- 
Year Follow-up Study of H.M.” Neuropsychologia , Vol. 6, 
pp. 215-234, 1968. 

Minsky, Marvin. Artificial Intelligence.” Scientific American, Vol. 
21 4&gt; PP- 19-27, 1966. 

Mittwoch, Ursula. “Human Anatomy.” Nature, Vol. 261, p. 364, 
1976. 

Nebes, D., and R. W. Sperry. “Hemispheric Deconnection Syn- 
drome with Cerebral Birth Injury in the Dominant Arm 
Area.” Neuropsychologia, Vol. 9, pp. 247-259, 1971. 

Oxnard, C. E. “The Place of the Australopithecines in Human 
Evolution: Grounds for Doubt?” Nature, Vol. 258, pp. 389- 
395. 1975- 

Penfield, W., and T. C. Erickson. Epilepsy and Cerebral Localiza- 
tion. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, 111., 1941. 

Penfield, W., and L. Roberts. Speech and Brain Mechanisms. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1959. 

Pilbeam, David. The Ascent of Man: An Introduction to Human 
Evolution. Macmillan, New York, 1972. 

Pilbeam, D., and S. J. Gould. “Size and Scaling in Human Evolu- 
tion.” Science, Vol. 186, pp. 892—901, 1974. 

Platt, John R. The Step to Man, John Wiley, New York, 1966. 


bibliography 


247 


Plooc, D. W., Blitz, J., and Ploog, F. “Studies on Social and Sexual 
Behavior of the Squirrel Monkey (Saimari sciureus) Folia 
Primatologica, Vol. 1, pp. 29-66, 1963. 

Poliakov, G. I. Neuron Structure of the Brain. Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1972. 

Premack, David. “Language and Intelligence in Ape and Man,” 
American Scientist, Vol. 64, pp. 674-683, 1976. 

Pribram, K. H. Languages of the Brain. Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J., 1971. 

Radinsky, Leonard. “Primate Brain Evolution,” American Scientist, 
Vol. 63, pp. 656-663, 1975. 

Radinsky, Leonard. “Oldest Horse Brains: More Advanced than 
Previously Realized.” Science, Vol. 194, pp. 626-627, 1976. 

Rall, W. “Theoretical Significance of. Dendritic Trees for Neuronal 
Input-Output Relations.” In Neural Theory and Modeling, R. 
F. Reiss, ed., Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1964. 

Rose, Steven. The Conscious Brain. Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 
1973- 

Rosenzweig, Mark R., Edward L. Bennett and Marian Cleeves 
Diamond. “Brain Changes in Response to Experience,” Scien- 
tific American, Vol. 226, No. 2, pp. 22-29, February 1972. 

Rumbaugh, D. M„ Gill, T. V, and E. C. von Glaserfeld. “Reading 
and Sentence Completion by a Chimpanzee.” Science, Vol. 
iS2, pp. 731-735, 1973. 

Russell, Dale A. A New Specimen of Stenonychosaurus from the 
Oldman Formation (Cretaceous) of Alberta.” Canadian Jour- 
nal of Earth Sciences, Vol. 6, pp. 595-612, 1969. 

Russell, Dale A. “Reptilian Diversity and the Cretaceous-Tertiary 
Transition in North America.” Geological Society of Canada 
Special Paper No. 13, pp. 119-136, 1973. 

Sagan, Carl. The Cosmic Connection: An Extraterrestrial Perspec- 
tive. Doubleday, New York, 1973; and Dell, New York, 1975. 

Sagan, Carl, ed. Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1973. 

Schmitt, Francis O., Parvati Dev, and Barry H. Smith. “Electro- 
tonic Processing of Information by Brain Cells.” Science, Vol. 
1 93, PP- 114-120, 1976. 

Schaller, George. The Mountain Gorilla: Ecology and Behavior. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1963. 


248 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Schank, R. C., and K. M. Colby, eds. Computer Models of Thought 
and Language. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1973. 

Shklovskii, I. S., and Carl Sagan. Intelligent Life in the Universe. 
Dell, New York, 1967. 

Snyder, F. “Toward an Evolutionary Theory of Dreaming.” Ameri- 
can Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 123, pp. 121-142, 1966. 

Sperry, R. W. “Perception in the Absence of the Neocortical Com- 
missures.” In Perception and Its Disorders, Research Publica- 
tion of the Association for Research in Nervous and Mental 
Diseases, Vol. 48, 1970. 

Stahl, Barbara J. “Early and Recent Primitive Brain Forms.” Pro- 
ceedings of the Conference on Evolution and Lateralization 
of the Brain, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 

1977- 

Swanson, Carl P. The Natural History of Man. Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1973. 

Teng, Evelyn Lee, Lee, P. H., Yang, K.-S., and P. C. Chang. 
“Handedness in a Chinese Population: Biological, Social and 
Pathological Factors.” Science, Vol. 193, pp. 1148-1150, 1976. 

Teuber, Hans-Lukas. “Effects of Focal Brain Injury on Human 
Behavior.” In The Nervous System, Donald B. Tower, editor- 
in-chief, Vol. 2: The Clinical Neurosciences. Raven Press, 
New York, 1975. 

Teuber, Hans-Lukas, Milner, Brenda, and Vaughan, H. G., Jr. 
“Persistent Anterograde Amnesia after Stab Wound of the 
Basal Brain.” Neuropsychologia, Vol. 6, pp. 267-282, 1968. 

Tower, D. B. “Structural and Functional Organization of Mammal- 
ian Cerebral Cortex: The Correlation of Neurone Density 
with Brain Size.” Journal of Comparative Neurology, Vol. 
101, pp. 19-51, 1954- 

Trotter, Robert J. “Language Evolving, Part II. Science News, 
Vol. 108, pp. 378-383, 1975- 

Trotter, Robert J. “Sinister Psychology.” Science News, Vol. 106, 
pp. 220-222, October 5, 1974. 

Turkewitz, Gerald. “The Development of Lateral Differentiation 
in the Human Infant.” Proceedings of the Conference on 
Evolution and Lateralization of the Brain, Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences, 1977. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


*49 


Vacroux, A. “Microcomputers.” Scientific American, Vol. 232, pp. 
32-40, May 1975. 

Van Lawick-Goodall, Jane. In the Shadow of Man. Houghton- 
Mifflin, Boston, 1971. 

van Valen, Leigh. Brain Size and Intelligence in Man.” American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 40, pp. 417-424, 1974. 
Von Neumann, John. The Computer and the Brain. Yale Univer- 
sity Press, New Haven, Conn., 1958. 

Wallace, Patricia. Unravelling the Mechanism of Memory,” 
Science, Vol. 190, pp. 1076-1078, 1975. 

Warren, J. M. “Possibly Unique Characteristics of Learning by Pri- 
mates.” Journal of Human Evolution, Vol. 3, pp. 445-454, 
1974 - 

Washburn, Sherwood L. Tools and Human Evolution,” Scientific 
American, Vol. 203, pp. 62—75, September i960. 

Washburn, S. L., and R. Moore. Ape Into Man. Little, Brown, 
Boston, 1974. 

Webb, W. B. Sleep, The Gentle Tyrant. Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J., 1975. 

Weizenbaum, Joseph. “Conversations with a Mechanical Psychia- 
trist.” The Harvard Review, Vol. 111, No. 2, pp. 68-73, 1965. 
Wendt, Herbert. In Search of Adam. Collier Books, New York, 

1963- 

Witelson, S. F., and W. Pallie. ‘Left Hemisphere Specialization 
for Language in the Newborn: Neuroanatomical Evidence of 
Asymmetry.” Brain, Vol. 96, pp. 641-646, 1973. 
Yeni-Komshian, G. H., and D. A. Benson. “Anatomical Study of 
Cerebral Asymmetry in the Temporal Lobe of Humans, 
Chimpanzees, and Rhesus Monkeys.” Science, Vol. 192, pp. 

387-389. 1978. 

Young, J. Z. A Model of the Brain. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1964. 



Accessing Computer jargon for making contact with information 
stored elsewhere. 

Affect (noun) A feeling or emotion, particularly a strong one. 

Alexia A weakening or loss of the ability to comprehend written 
or printed words and sentences. Compare with aphasia 

Ameslan American sign language, widely used by persons with 
impaired speech and hearing. 

Amygdala An almond-shaped component of the limbic system ad- 
joining the temporal lobe of the neocortex. 

Anaglyph A two-dimensional stereo representation of a three- 
dimensional image; most often composed of red and green 
dots, and viewed with red and green eyeglasses. 

Anterior commissure A relatively minor bundle of nerve fibers 
that connects the left and right cerebral hemispheres of the 
neocortex. Compare with corpus callosum. 

Aphasia Generally, a weakening or loss of the ability to articulate 
ideas by language in any form. It is sometimes used more 
narrowly to indicate the inability to recognize spoken 
words. Compare with alexia. 

Bilateral On both sides. 

Bits Units of binary information. One bit is the answer to a single 
yes or no question. 6 

Brainstem See Hindbrain. 

Broca s area A portion of the neocortex intimately connected with 
speech. 

Buffer dumping The accessing (q.v.) or disposal of information 
temporarily deposited in a short-term memory. 

cc Abbreviation for cubic centimeter. 

Cerebellum A brain mass lying in the back of the head under- 



352 


GLOSSARY 


neath the posterior cerebral cortex and above the pons and 
medulla in the hindbrain. Like the neocortex, it has two 
hemispheres. 

Cerebral cortex In humans and higher mammals the large outer 
layer of the cerebral hemispheres, in major part responsible 
for our characteristically human behavior. Sometimes synony- 
mous with neopallium or neocortex ( q.v. ) . 

Cetacea An order of aquatic mammals that includes whales and 
dolphins. 

Chromosomes The long strands of hereditary material containing 
the genes, and composed exclusively of nucleic acids. 

Convolution See Gyrus. 

Corpus callosum The great commissure, or bundle of nerve fibers, 
which is the principal cabling between the left and right 
hemispheres of the cerebral cortex. 

Craniotomy The cutting or removal of part of the skull, generally 
as an antecedent to brain surgery. 

DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid. See Nucleic acids. 

Electrode A solid electrical conductor through which an electric 
current moves. Electrical currents in the brain are sensed by 
an electroencephalograph throughbts electrodes. 

Electroencephalograph (EEG) A device consisting of ampli- 
fiers and a pen automatically writing on a rotating drum, 
used for recording the electrical currents in the brain con- 
ducted to the device by electrodes attached to the surface of 
the head. It is useful for medical diagnosis and for studies of 
the function of the brain. 

Endocast A mold of an interior; in this book, a mold of the in- 
terior of a fossil braincase. 

Endocranial Within the skull. 

Endorphins Small internally produced brain proteins which can 
induce a variety of emotional or other states in animals. 

Equipotent Having equal ability; in particular, the view that for 
certain cognitive or other functions any part of the brain can 
substitute for any other. 

Extirpation The entire removal of a unit of the brain, usually by 
surgical procedures. 

Extragenetic information Information carried outside the genes 
— generally in brains and in cultures. 


glossary 


253 


Extrasomatic information Information carried outside the body 
( for example, the contents of books ) . 

Forebrain The evolutionary most recent of the three major divi- 
sions of the vertebrate brain. Also called the prosencephalon. 
It is divided in turn into the R-complex, limbic system, and 
neocortex. 

Frontal lobe Approximately, the portion of the neocortex be- 
neath the forehead. 

Gametes Mature sperm or egg cells capable of participating in 
fertilization. They contain a haploid (q.v.) number of chro- 
mosomes. 

Gyrus One of the prominent rounded elevations on the surface of 
the neocortex. Also called convolution. 

Haploid Having a number of chromosomes equal to half the num- 
ber in an ordinary body or somatic cell. For example in 
human beings each somatic cell has 46 chromosomes but each 
gamete ( q.v. ) has 23 chromosomes. 

Hindbrain The most ancient part of the brain, including the pons, 
cerebellum, medulla oblongata, and the upper portion of the 
spinal cord. It is also called the brainstem or the rhomben- 
cephalon. 

Hippocampal commissure A relatively minor bundle of nerve 
fibers which connects the left and right hemispheres of the 
cerebral cortex near the hippocampus. Compare with corpus 
callosum. r 

Hippocampus A structure in the limbic system connected with 
memory. 

Hypothalamus A portion of the limbic system lying below the 
thalamus which, among other functions, helps to regulate 
bodily temperature and metabolic processes. 

kg Abbreviation for kilogram. 

Lateralization The separation of function between two sides, 
especially the left and right hemispheres of the neocortex 

Lesion A cut, wound, or injury. Some brain lesions occur by acci- 
dent and some by surgical procedure. 

Limbic system The part of the forebrain intermediate in locale 
and antiquity between the R-complex and the neocortex 

Lobes of the neocortex See Frontal lobe, Occipital lobe, Parietal 
lobe, and Temporal lobe. 


354 


GLOSSARY 


Lobotomy A surgical incision into or lesion of one of the neocor- 
tical lobes ( q.v. ) . 

Localization of brain function The finding that certain parts of 
the brain perform certain specific functions. It is the opposite 
of the equipotent ( q.v. ) hypothesis. 

Long-term memory Memory retained for substantial periods of 
time — for example, more than a day. 

m Abbreviation for meter. 

Medulla oblongata ( sometimes called simply Medulla ) The por- 
tion of the brain at the region of its connection with the 
spinal cord. It is a part of the hindbrain. 

Microcephalic One with an abnormally small head. The condi- 
tion is often associated with significant mental impairment. 

Midbrain The middle region of the vertebrate brain, between the 
hindbrain and forebrain. Also called the mesencephalon. 

Motor cortex The portion of the neocortex concerned with mo- 
tion and coordination of the limbs. 

Mutations Inheritable changes in the nucleic acids of chromo- 
somes. 

Natural selection The principal method of biological evolution, 
as first described by Darwin and Wallace. The preferential 
survival and reproduction of organisms fortuitously better 
adapted to their environments than their competitors. 

Neocortex The outermost, evolutionarily most recent part of the 
cerebral cortex. Sometimes used as synonymous with cerebral 
cortex. 

Neural chassis The combination of spinal cord, hindbrain, and 
midbrain. 

Neuron or Neurone A nerve cell, the basic unit of the nervous 
system, and the fundamental building block of the brain. 

Niche, ecological An organism’s role in nature. 

Nucleic acids The genetic material of all life on Earth, consisting 
of ladder-like sequences of units called nucleotides, usually 
arranged in a double helix. There are two main varieties of 
nucleic acids, DNA and RNA. 

Nucleotide The fundamental building blocks of the nucleic acids 

(q- v -)- . , 

Occipital lobe Approximately, the portion of the neocortex under 
the back of the skull. 


GLOSSARY 


255 


Olfactory bulbs Components of the brain attached to the front 
of the forebrain, and playing an important role in the per- 
ception of smells. 

Parietal lobe Aproximately, the middle portion of each cerebral 
hemisphere of the neocortex. 

Pituitary The “master” endocrine gland, situated in the limbic 
system but near the midbrain and influencing both growth 
and the operations of other endocrine glands. 

Plasticity The capability to be shaped or formed; in particular, 
the ability to learn from the external environment. 

Pons ( also called Pons varioli ) The neural bridge connecting the 
medulla oblongata and the midbrain. It is a part of the 
brainstem. 

Prewired Computer jargon for information already in place. Also 
called hard-wired. The more prewiring, the less plasticity. 

Primary processes Psychoanalytic term for the fundamental un- 
conscious functions of the brain. 

Primates An order ( one of the taxonomic classifications ) of mam- 
mals that includes lemurs, monkeys, apes, and humans. 

Proteins Along with the nucleic acids, the principal molecular 
basis of life on Earth. Proteins are made of constituent units 
called amino acids and are ordinarily elaborately folded and 
coiled. Some proteins are spherical in overall shape, while 
others resemble free-standing nonrepresentationalist sculp- 
ture. All enzymes, which control the rate of chemical reac- 
tions in the cell, are proteins. The synthesis and activation of 
enzymes are controlled by the nucleic acids. 

Psychomotor Relating to mental control of muscular processes. 

R-complex or Reptilian complex The evolutionarily most ancient 
part of the forebrain. 

Recapitulation or the recapitulation of phylogeny by ontog- 
eny The apparent repetition, during the embryonic de- 
velopment of an individual organism, of a past evolutionary 
stage of the species. 

REM Rapid eye movements, particularly those which occur under 
the eyelids during dream sleep. Therefore, the characteriza- 
tion of such a sleep. 

RNA Ribonucleic acid. See Nucleic acids. 

Selection pressure In evolutionary theory, the influence of the 


256 


CLOSSAHY 


environment in selecting for survival and reproduction a par- 
ticular set of genetic characteristics. 

Short-term memory Memory retained for brief periods of time— 
for example, less than a day. 

Synapse The junction of two neurons: the locale where an elec- 
tiical impulse is transmitted from one neuron to another. 

Taxon (plural, Taxa) A group of organisms classified according 
to common characteristics, ranging from minor distinctions 
such as races and subspecies to major distinctions such as 
the differences between the plant and animal kingdoms. 

Temporal lobe Approximately, the portion of the neocortex be- 
neath the temples of the skull. 

Thalamus A portion of the limbic system near the center of the 
brain. Among other functions, it replays sensory stimuli to the 
neocortex. 

TOMY The cutting of an organ represented by the dashes 
(see, for example, Craniotomy or Lobotomy). 

Triune brain The idea, most recently advocated by Paul Mac- 
Lean, that the forebrain comprises three separately evolved 
and to some degree independently functioning cognitive sys- 
tems. 

Zygote A fertilized egg. 


INDEX 


( Named individuals are human, except as noted otherwise ) 


A 

Abortion debate, 194-199 
Adam and Eve, 93-99, 138 
Aeschylus, 127, 128, 150 
Alexia, 73 
Allison, Truett, 130 
Amnesia, in infancy and dreams, 
147 

Amygdala, 64 
Anterior commissure, 167 
Aphasia, 72 
Aristotle, 20, 39 
Atropine, 203, 204 
Augustine, Saint, 236, 237 
Australopithicenes, gracile, 3g, 
40, 84-89, 90-92, 104, 178 
Australopithicenes, robust, 87, 
88, 90, 91, 179 


B 

Babel, Tower of, 123 
Bakker, Robert, 132 
Bees, 74 

Beetles, South African, 68-69 
Berkeley, Bishop, 107 
Bernal, J. D., 192 


Bits, 23-25 

Black and white, 176 

Blake, William, 20 

Blood, human responses to, 182 

Bloodhounds, 155 

Books, 3, 26, 224 

Brain 

density of information con- 
tent, 45-46 

differences between the sexes 
and among the races, 34-36 
human, possible improvements 
in, 199-204 

information content of, 26, 41- 

47 

mass in humans, 33-36 
microcircuits, 42, 43 
third ventricle of, 63, 64 
Brain to body mass ratio, 37-40 
Brain waves : see Electroenceph- 
alograph 

Brains, nonhuman vertebrate, 
5b 52 

Brainstem, 70 
Brand, Stewart, 216 
Britten, R. J., 26 
Broca’s area, 101, 102 
Bronowski, Jacob, 3, 5, 113, 192, 
237, 238 



258 


INDEX 


Buffer and buffer dumping in 
brain, 42, 142, 143, 170 
Bushmen of the Kalahari, 6, 101 
Byron, George Gordon, Lord, 
33, 35-36 

C 

Cadmus, 222 
Cain and Abel, 94 
Campbell, Bernard, 201 
Carroll, Lewis, 126 
Caspar (squirrel monkey), 53, 
54 

Cerebellum, 40, 41 
Cetacea (whales and dolphins), 
38-40, 77, 107-108, 129, 
!3L 199, 205 
Chesterton, G. K., 62 
Childbirth, pain of, 92, 93 
Chimpanzees, 104, 108-124, 204 
Chomsky, Noam, 122 
Ciccheti, Domenic, 130 
Computer analogies to brain 
function, 169, 205 
Computer, electronic, density of 
information content in, 45- 
46 

Computer “psychiatrist,” 206- 
209 

Computers, 206-225, 229, 230, 

234 

Conrad, Joseph, 188 
Convergent evolution of intelli- 
gence, 232, 233 

Corpus callosum, 29, 159-167, 
180, 181, 185 

Cosmic Calendar, 13-17, 102, 
144, 238 


Cosmic Connection, The, 77, 100 
Crocodiles, 65 
Cro-Magnons, 102, 103 
Cromwell, Oliver, 33 
Cultural change, 189-193, 236- 
238 

Cultural traditions among pri- 
mates, 117-119 


D 

Dart, Raymond, 92, 179 
Darwin, Charles, ix-x, 5-6, 87, 
122, 123, 142, 191 
Davidson, E. H., 26 
da Vinci, Leonardo, 84, 179, 191 
de la Mare, Walter, 126 
Delgado, Jose, 204 
Dement, William, 145, 146, 148, 
170 

Descartes, Ren6, 185 
Dewson, James, 116, 172 
Dimond, Stuart, 180 
Dinosaurs, 131-138, 142 
brains of, 37-39 
extinction of, 134-137 
“Dirty” words, 54, 111, 201 
DNA, 21, 23, 25-28 
Dog, and direction-finding syl- 
logism, 209-210 

Dominance, connection with sex, 

53, 54 

Dragons, 93, 138-141, 222 
Drake, Frank, 229-230 
Dreams, 76, 83-84, 128-129, 

1 4 2 -i5i, 169-172 
Dryden, John, 154, 167 


INDEX 


259 


E 

Eden, 92-99, 104, 138, 141 
Eggs, vulnerability of reptilian, 
134. 135 

Einstein, Albert, 33, 184, 233 
Electrical stimulation of the 
brain, 31-33, 130 
Electroencephalograph, 128, 130, 

146, 197 

Emotions, importance of the lim- 
bic system for, 62, 64—66 
Endorphins, 200, 201, 203 
ENIAC (computer), 212 
Epilepsy, 55, i43~i44&gt; 158-161, 
204-205 

Equipotent view of brain func- 
tion, 28-30 

Erasmus, Desiderius, 191 
Europa, 222 
Evolution, 4-6 

Extragenetic information, 3, 28 
Extrasomatic information, 3-4, 
26 

Extraterrestrial intelligence, 4-5, 
229-234 


F 

Facial recognition, 72-73, 157- 

158 

Fire, domestication of, 90-91 
Ford, Gerald, 179 
Forebrain, 51-52 
Forrestal, James, 181 
France, Anatole, 33, 35-36 
Frankenstein’s monster, 41 


Freud, Sigmund, 78, 79, 142, 148, 
149, 171, 188, 191 
Fromm, Erich, 171 


G 

Galileo, 191, 232 
Galin, David, 168 
Galvani, Luigi, 40, 41 
Gardners, Beatrice and Robert, 
109, 110, 123 

Gazzaniga, M. S., 164, 165, 168 
Genetic information, 3, 21, 22-26 
Gerard, Ralph, 32 
Gilles de la Tourette’s disease, 
201 

Gill slits in human embryology, 

58 

Goddard, Robert H., 84 
Goodall, Jane, 117 
Gorillas, 131 
Gould, S. J., 6 
Greenberg, Donald, 213 
Greenough, William, 45 
Grinspoon, Lester, 199, 200 

H 

Haeckel, Ernst, 57-58 
Haldane, J. B. S., 192 
Hammurabi ( computer game ) , 
219 

Handedness, 177, 179 
Hands, evolution of, 85 
Hangman ( computer game ) , 
218, 219 

Hartmann, Ernest, 143 


26 o 


INDEX 


Herrick, C. Judson, 93, 156 
Hindbrain, 51, 52, 55 
Hippocampus, 66 
H. M., 66, 74 
Hobbes, Thomas, 77 
Holloway, Ralph L., 101 
Homer, 100, 224 

Homo erectus, 22, 88, 90-91, 103 
Homo habilis, 22, 85-86, 88, 89- 
9 1 , 1( &gt;2 

Homo sapiens, 22, 88, 103 
Horse, evolution of, 89 
Hubei, David, 33 
“Humanities,” 77 
Humans, uniqueness of, 42-43 
Hunter/ gatherers, 191-192, 193; 
see also Bushmen of the 
Kalahari 

Huxley, T. H., 5-6, 228 


I 

Industrial melanism, 27-28 
“Identikit,” 157 

Immobilization hypothesis, 131- 
1 35 » 137 

Imo (macaque), 119 


J 

Jackson, Hughlings, 199 
Jerison, Harry, 39, 132 
Job, x 

Josephus, 104 
Jouvet, Michel, 143 
Jung, Carl Gustav, 148 


K 

Keith, Arthur, 103 
Kekule von Stradonitz, Fried- 
rich, 170 

Keller, Helen, 121, 122 
Kemeny, John G., 217 
Kohler, Wolfgang, 108 
Komodo dragon, 138-140 
Korsakov, S., 115 


L 

Lana (chimpanzee), 110-113 
Langer, Susanne, 61 
Language, 2, 72-74, 122-124, 
169, 170, 173-174, 205-225 
evolution of, 99-102, 108-124 
Lashley, Karl, 29 
Lawrence, D. H., 182 
Lawrence Hall of Science, com- 
puter programs at, 217, 221 
Leakey, L. S. B., 85, 91, 99 
Leakey, Richard, 91 
Le Gros Clark, Wilfred, 92 
Lenin, V. I., 176 

Limbic system, 56, 57, 62-69, 7° 
Lincoln, Abraham, 189 
Linnaeus, Carl, 106 
Lions, 65, 131 

Lobes of the neocortex: see neo- 
cortex 

Localization of brain function, 

28-35 

Locke, John, 107, 113 
Lucy (chimpanzee), 110-113, 
114, 116 


INDEX 


26 l 


M O 


Macaques, 53, 117, 119 
Machiavelli, 61 
MacLean, Paul, 51-57, 79 . 1 47 
Manic-depressive syndrome, 200, 

201 

Marijuana, 169, 172, 191 
Masha, 115, 116 
Maxwell, James Clerk, 236 
Meddis, Ray, 131 
Memory, 31, 32, 74-76 
Microcephalies, 36, 114-116 
Midbrain, 51, 52, 55 
Milton, John, 82 
Mind, 7 

Montaigne, Michel de, 107, 209- 
210 

Mormyrids, 233, 234 
Motor cortex, 32, 33, 35, 99 
Motor homunculus, 35 
Music, 166, 167, 206 
Mutations, 27-28, 191 
Mystical doctrines, 236-238 
Myths, 7, 8 


N 

Natural selection, 5-6, 27-28 
Neanderthals, 94-95, 102, 103 
Neocortex, 56, 57, 61, 69-76, 84- 
103, 104, 127, 149-151, 172. 
189, 192, 203, 238 
Neural chassis, 55, 56 
Neuron, 40-43 

Newtonian physics, 183, 215—216 


Orangutans, 108 

Orchids, South African, 68—69 

Ornstein, Robert, 168 


P 


Paranoid thinking, 180-185 
Pelvic girdle, recent evolution of 
in humans, 92 

Penfield, Wilder, 31, 32, 34, 35, 
75 . M 3 

Phaedrus, 2, 79, 166, 221-223 
Photosynthesis, evolution of, 58- 
60 

Pong (computer game), 214- 
216 

Pioneer 10, 235 
Pituitary, 64 
Plasticity, 3, 45, 61 
Plato, 2, 8, 79, 122, 166, 171, 221- 
223 

Pliny, 22, 209 
Plotinus, ix 
Plutarch, 209 
Polymaths, 192 
Praying mantis, 67 
Proconsul, 98 

Prometheus, 91, 123, 127, 221, 
225 

Psychedelics, 62, 171, 203 
Pygmies, 191 


262 


INDEX 


R 

Ramapithecus, 98 
R-complex, 55, 56, 60-62, 147, 
1 49 -1 5 1 &gt; 169, 170, 189, 192, 
203, 238 

Recapitulation, 57-60, 146, 197, 
198 

Red as an index of danger, 182 
Rensberger, Royce, 112 
Rhesus monkeys, 116, 117 
Right and left, 174-185 
Rosenzweig, Mark, 45 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 6-9 
Rubicon idea of brain evolu- 
tion, 103-104, 114-116 
Russell, Bertrand, 192 
Russell, Dale, 37 


S 

Saint George, 140, 141 
Salustius, 7-8 

Saurornithoides, 37-39, 135 
Schizophrenia, 62, 199, 200 
Science and mathematics, as ex- 
amples of characteristic hu- 
man thinking, 183-185, 
232-238 

Sensory homunculus, 34 
Sex and smell, 67-69 
Sex, connection with dominance, 
53. 54 

Sex and aggression, 192 
Shakespeare, William, 12, 50, 
126, 154, 228 


Sharks, 38, 108 

Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft, 41 

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 82 

Shklovskii, I. S., 136 

Shrew, common, 129 

Shrew, European pygmy, 39 

Silkworm, 68 

Sleep, 128-147 

Smell and sex, 67-69 

Smell, nature of the sense of, 

Socrates, 8 

Space War (computer game), 
216 

Sperry, Roger, 158-159, 169 
Sports and hunting, 99 
Squirrel monkeys, 52-53 
Sultan (chimpanzee), 108 
Synapses, 41-42, 45 


T 

Tacitus, 221-222 
Taxa, 21-22 
Tetonius, 97 

Teuber, Hans-Lukas, 70, 108 
Thinking sideways, 75-76 
Thomas Aquinas, Saint, 210 
Thoreau, Henry David, 2 
Thoth, 123, 221-222 
Tigers, 131 
Toes, human, 4 

Tools, invention of, 87-91, 92- 
94, 98, 117, 118 

Trees and human origins, 83-84, 
182, 232, 233 


INDEX 


263 


Triune brain, 54-55, 57, 61-62, 
77-79 

Truffaut, Frangois, 107 
Truman, Harry, 179 
Tsiolkovskii, Konstantin, 84 
Turgenev, Ivan, 33 
Turnbull, Colin, 191 
2001: A Space Odyssey , 123 


V 

Vampire hypothesis: see Immo- 
bilization hypothesis 
Van Valen, Leigh, 36 
Viking, 25, 44, 174, 209 
Visual field, 161 
Von Frisch, Karl, 74 


W 

Wallace, Alfred Russel, 5-6, 108 
Washburn, Sherwood, 98, 137, 
149 

Washoe (chimpanzee), 110-113, 
116, 117 

Webb, Wilse, 131 
Weizenbaum, Joseph, 206 
Whitehead, Alfred North, 188 
White, Leslie, 113-114 
Wilberforce, Bishop, 5 
Witchcraft, 203-204 


Y 

“Yerkish,” 112-115 



ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Carl Sagan holds the David Duncan chair as Pro- 
fessor of Astronomy and Space Sciences at Cornell 
University, where he is also Director of the Labora- 
tory for Planetary Studies. The author or editor of 
fourteen books and innumerable shorter pieces, in- 
cluding the comprehensive article called “Life” in 
the latest edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 
he has received the NASA Medal for Exceptional 
Scientific Achievement, the John Campbell Award 
for best science book of the year, and the Joseph 
Priestley Prize “for distinguished contributions to the 
welfare of mankind.” He has served on the faculties 
of Stanford Medical School and Harvard University 
and during 1976-77 was with the Viking Mars Proj- 
ect in Pasadena, California. 

Carl Sagan holds the David Duncan chair 
as Professor of Astronomy and Space Sci- 
ences at Cornell University, where he is 
also Director of the Laboratory for Planetary 
Studies. The author or editor of fourteen 
books and innumerable shorter pieces, in- 
cluding the comprehensive article called 
“Life” in the latest edition of the Encyclo- 
paedia Britannica , he has received the 
NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific 
Achievement, the John Campbell Award for 
best science book of the year, and the 
Joseph Priestley Prize “for distinguished 
contributions to the welfare of mankind.” 
He has served on the faculties of Stanford 
Medical School and Harvard University, 
and during 1976 was with the Viking Mars 
Project in Pasadena, California. 


Cover painting by Don Davis 

Random House, Inc., New York, N.Y 10022 
Printed in U.S.A 




PHOTO:© SUE HOULE 1976 


“Carl Sagan has the Midas touch. Any subject he deals with turns to gold, 
and so it is in The Dragons of Eden. Never have I read anything on the subject 
of human intelligence as fascinating and as charming” — Isaac Asimov 

“A wise, witty, well-informed, up-to-the-minute account of the evolution of 
intelligence, and a much-needed antidote to the still-rising tide of irrational 
psychology and occult nonsense. No one can read it without acquiring a 
deeper, saner understanding of the powers and limitations of that mysterious 
minicomputer just above and behind one’s eyes.' - Martin Gardner 



“Carl Sagan has the Midas touch. Any subject he deals with turns to gold, 
and so it is in The Dragons of Eden. Never have I read anything on the subject 
of human intelligence as fascinating and as charming!’ — Isaac Asimov 

“A wise, witty, well-informed, up-to-the-minute account of the evolution of 
intelligence, and a much-needed antidote to the still-rising tide of irrational 
psychology and occult nonsense. No one can read it without acquiring a 
deeper, saner understanding of the powers and limitations of that mysterious 
minicomputer just above and behind one’s eyes!’ — Martin Gardner 


CARL SAGAN 

THE DRAGONS 
OF EDEN 

SPECULATIONS ON THE EVOLUTION 
OF HUMAN INTELUGENCE 
